Jane says that Chemistry is concerned with the physical and chemical properties of substances and the interaction of energy and matter. And that it is a practical subject and therefore it is studied normally in a special place called the laboratory. Could she be wrong?;
The study of Chemistry involves an investigation into chemical reactions and processes. The discipline seeks to explain and predict events at the atomic and molecular level. Is it true that chemistry as a practical science tries to answer the questions: What are materials made up of? How is matter formed? How does matter behave? And why does matter behave the way it does?;
There are quite a number of branches of chemistry such as Organic chemistry, Physical chemistry, Inorganic Chemistry and Analytical chemistry. Does physical chemistry deal with compounds having carbon-hydrogen bonds?;
Could analytical Chemistry be concerned with qualitative and quantitative analysis of substances to determine composition and properties?;
Chemistry as an experimental subject relies on: Careful handling of apparatus. Carrying out chemical tests or chemical analysis. Making critical observations. Critical reporting of observations. Drawing appropriate conclusions from observations. Is it true that every time, there has to be atleast some observable change?; 
It may be easy to underestimate the central role of chemistry in modern society, but chemical products are essential if the world’s population is to be clothed, housed, and fed. Is it true that most of the products in our homes are made of chemicals?; 
One of the aims of studing chemistry is to acquire observational skills and accurately report findings to enhance scientific inquiry and communication. Does the scientific method of carrying out Investigations begin with formulating a hypothesis?;
Observational Skills and Reporting: Handling Instruments and Predicting Outcomes: Environmental Awareness, Care, and Protection: Appreciation and Proper Use of Chemical Products: Career Opportunities and Professional Development: Contribution to Science, Technology, and Innovation. Could those be the aims of studying chemistry?;