THEME: NUMBERS
TOPIC 2: WORKING WITH INTEGERS 15 PERIODS
Competency: The learner carries out calculations with positive and negative integers;

LEARNING OUTCOMES SUGGESTED LEARNING ACTIVITIES SAMPLE ASSESSMENT STRATEGY
The learner should be able to:
a) identify, read and write natural
numbers as numerals and words in
million, billion and trillion. (u s)
b) differentiate between natural
numbers and whole numbers/
integers. (u)
c) identify directed numbers. (k)
d) use directed numbers (limited to
integers) in real life situations. (u
s)
e) use the hierarchy of operations to
carry out the four mathematical
operations on integers. (u)
f) identify even, odd, prime and
composite numbers. (k u)
g) find the prime factorisation of any
number. (k u s)
h) relate common factors with HCF
and multiples with LCM. (k u)
i) work out and use divisibility tests of
some numbers. (k, u, s, v/a)
• Order numbers and locate them on a
number line
• Use directed number in context e.g;

temperature, height above and below
sea level, floors in a building
• Investigate multiples on a 1-100 square
and notice that the digital root (i.e. the
sum of the digits) of multiples of three is
always a multiple of three, and for multiples
of nine the digital root is a multiple of
nine. Determine how to distinguish other
multiples (e.g. 2 (even numbers), 5, 10);

• Investigate the factors of numbers 1 to 30 –
Which numbers have just two factors?
Which numbers have an odd number of
factors?
• Use exactly four 4s to make as many whole
number answers between 1 and 100 e.g;

(4+4×4) ÷4= (4+16) ÷4=5,
• recording the calculations correctly
• Determine the prime factorisation of any
integer;



• Nambi has four number cards:
She can arrange the cards to form different
numbers. For example, she can form the
number 3407
3 4 0 7
What is the greatest even number Nambi
can form using all four of her number cards?
What is the least odd number she can form
using all four of her number cards?
• How many hundreds are there in
one million?
• What are the prime factorisations of 942 and
357? Hence find the HCF of 942 and 357, and
the LCM;

