Experimental chemistry is the science of observation. A laboratory is a special place with special equipment where scientific investigations or experiments are carried out. An investigation is a set of instructions or procedures that must be followed in order to come up with a conclusion. Apparatus are scientific tools that are used in carrying out scientific experiments. Could there be false statements?;
It is important for beginners in form one to be acquainted with laboratory rules and safety measures before they can confidently use the chemistry laboratory. Laboratory rules and safety measures are to safeguard users and others while in the laboratory. Hazardous reagents could be a risk to health, property and the environment. International rules require that hazardous chemicals are labelled and classified as per set standards?; Are all the provided statements true?;
To extinguish a fire, Raniah pulls the pin to break the tamper seal, unlocking the extinguisher. She aims low, pointing the nozzle or hose at the base of the fire and stands 6-10 feet away. She then squeezes the handle/lever to release/discharge the extinguishing agent. She finally sweeps the spray from side to side at the base of the fire until it is off. Did she get most of the steps wrong?;
Laboratory apparatus are pieces of equipment used in the laboratory for experiments. Most of the apparatus in the chemistry laboratory are made of glassware because glass is transparent and enables the experimenter to observe easily the reactions occurring. It also doesn't react with most common laboratory chemicals. Could this be true?;
Some experiments carried out in the laboratory require heating for reactions to occur. Is it true, that some of the heat sources that can be used in the laboratory include an electric heater, a paraffin stove and commonly a bunsen burner, which uses electricity as a source of fuel?;
The Bunsen burner mixes the gas with air in the correct proportions to give a very hot flame. The gas enters the burner through the jet at the bottom and burns at the top of the chimney. The collar has a hole on each side of it and air can pass through the hole and mix with the gas as it goes up the tube. The amount of air entering can be adjusted by turning the collar. Could all this be true?;
The flames of a candle and burning oil are smoky and luminous, and are not used for heating in the laboratory, since they are not hot enough and cover apparatus with black soot/carbon monoxide. Could this be true?;
A barrel is a long cylindrical metallic pipe that allows gas to pass through to be used to create a flame. A collar is a movable metal ring used to regulate the amount of air entering through the air holes. An air hole is an opening that allows air to enter the Bunsen burner so that when it mixes with the gas from the jet, it burns when lit. Could this be true?;
The jet is a large hole where the gas enters the burner. The Gas inlet joins the Bunsen burner to the gas cylinder and transmits the gas from the gas cylinder to the jet of the Bunsen burner. The Base is a heavy metal that ensures the Bunsen burner is stable. It is where the burner sits and gets its support in an upright position. Could this be true?;
Messi usually connects the Bunsen burner to the gas cylinder, Turns the collar until the air holes are closed, Turns on the gas fully, Lights the gas immediately at the chimney to produce a flame, Adjusts the size of the hole until the flame is about 7cm high, Opens the air holes slowly until the flame is non luminous but not noisy. He makes sure that the gas is turned off when not in use, by closing the air holes first and then turning off the tap. Does he follow the right procedure?;
A flame are burning gases that give out heat and light. A Luminous flame is the flame produced when the air holes are closed such that no air enters the tube. The flame is large, bright, yellow and not very hot. A luminous flame has three parts or zones with different colours. A Non luminous flame is a flame produced when the air holes of the Bunsen burner are open. The flame becomes smaller and hotter. It gives out only a little light because it contains no carbon. The non luminous flame has four zones. Could this be true?; 
Burning Back/Strike Back is a phenomenon where the flame moves down the chimney and is seen to burn at the jet. It occurs when the air holes of the Bunsen burner are left open and the gas is turned down so that the rate at which the gas is burnt exceeds the rate at which it is supplied from the jet. Strike Back can cause explosion, leading to destruction of property and lives. When burning back occurs, one turns off the gas, closes the air holes and lights the burner again, using the normal procedure. Could this be true?; 
Both luminous and non luminous flames have the dark zone/zone of unburnt gas. Both flames have a luminous zone where the gas do not burn completely. In this zone, the carbon particles glow to give out light. Both flames have the non luminous zone where gas burns completely. Both flames have 4 zones. Could this be true?;  
Mass of a substance is the amount of matter it contains. Mass is measured in kilograms (kg) and grams (g). 1000mg = 1g. 1000g = 1kg. 1000kg = 1 tonne. In a beam balance, a weight is moved along a horizontal scale until it balances the mass of object on the scale pan. An electronic balance is easy to use and can measure to accuracy of 0.001g very quickly. Could all this be true?;
Volume of a substance is the amount of space it occupies. Unit for measuring volume is cm³, dm³, m³ and litres. 1000cm³ = 1dm³. 10dm³ = 1litre. 1000dm³ = 1m³. Could this be true?; 
Time is the interval between two occurrences. It is measured using a stopwatch or stop clock. Measuring unit for time is a second, s. Most stopwatches measure to accuracy of 0.01s. 60s = 1min. 60min = 1h. 24h = 1day. Could this be true?; 
Temperature is the degree of hotness and coldness. The temperature of a liquid or gas can be measured using a thermometer. Measuring unit for temperature is ⁰C. 1⁰C = 1K. Could this be true?;  
When gases are required dry, as in most cases, they are passed through liquid and solid desiccants. Concentrated sulphuric acid is a common drying agent but it cannot be used to dry gases which are basic. Anhydrous calcium chloride is not used to dry ammonia gas because it reacts with the gas. Calcium oxide is a drying agent used to dry basic gases such as ammonia. During the large-scale manufacture of oxygen, air free from Carbon dioxide is usually passed through silica gel to absorb water vapour. Could all this be true?; 
Organic liquids are the only liquids that can be dried as some contain a little amount of water. The liquid can be dried by the process of fractional distillation or by use of desiccants placed in a desiccator. Solids with moisture can be dried by slight warming or by evaporating water from the solid at a temperature slightly below the melting point of the solids. Solids however, can't be dried by placing them in desiccators. Could this be true?;  
The collection of a gas depends on whether the gas is heavier or lighter than air, and also if the gas is soluble or insoluble in water. Which of the following gases can't be collected by downward delivery? (a) Carbon dioxide (b) Sulphur dioxide (c) Chlorine (d) Carbon monoxide; 
The collection of a gas depends on whether the gas is heavier or lighter than air, and also if the gas is soluble or insoluble in water. Which of the following gases can't be collected by upward displacement of air? (a) Ammonia (b) Sulphur dioxide (c) Sulphur trioxide (d) Hydrogen chloride; 
The collection of a gas depends on whether the gas is heavier or lighter than air, and also if the gas is soluble or insoluble in water. Which of the following gases can't be collected by upward delivery? (a) Oxygen (b) Sulphur dioxide (c) Ammonia (d) Carbon monoxide; 
The collection of a gas depends on whether the gas is heavier or lighter than air, and also if the gas is soluble or insoluble in water. Which of the following gases can't be collected by downward displacement of air? (a) Hydrogen (b) Nitrogen (c) Sulphur trioxide (d) Carbon monoxide;
The collection of a gas depends on whether the gas is heavier or lighter than air, and also if the gas is soluble or insoluble in water. Which of the following gases can't be collected over water? (a) Hydrogen (b) Nitrogen (c) Oxygen (d) Chlorine; 
The collection of a gas depends on whether the gas is heavier or lighter than air, and also if the gas is soluble or insoluble in water. Jane however, says that a gas like nitrogen dioxide, could be collected using the freezing method. That it could be liquefied by cooling it in an ice-cold freezing mixture in a U-tube. Could he be wrong?; 
The use of a gas syringe collects any gas irrespective of its density or solubility. It is easy to know if the syringe is full of the gas or not. It is easy to transport the gas. Air does not easily mix with the gas collected and therefore, it is almost pure. The volume of gas collected is known, and correct volumes of gases are used. However, the method is only suitable for collecting gases produced in small quantities. Could all this be true?;
When carrying out a scientific investigation, Jane follows the following steps: Observation, Hypothesis Formulation, Methodology, Data Collection, Data Analysis, Hypothesis Testing, Theory and/or Law Development, and finally conclusions that may include implications, recommendations, or areas for further research. Are her steps in the right order?;
Oxygen relights a glowing splint. Hydrogen pops with a burning splint. Carbon dioxide turns lime water milky. Sulphur dioxide turns purple acidified potassium permanganate colourless. Chlorine turns damp blue litmus paper red and then bleaches it white. Ammonia turns damp red litmus paper blue. Are these tests of gases, right?; 
Water turns blue anhydrous CoCl₂ paper pink. Water turns white anhydrous CuSO₄ powder blue. Could one of those two tests be wrong?;