TOPIC 04 ***CULTURE AND KEY ETHNIC GROUPS IN EAST Africa*** "12 Periods". Competency; The learner understands the concept of culture and the people relations in East Africa. Learning Outcomes; The learner should be able to; a) appreciate the existence of cultural values in our families (k, u); b) know the key cultural institutions and your leaders in East Africa (k); c) know cultural centres that exist in East Africa (k); d) know the ethnic groups in East Africa; e) analyse the contribution of cultural handcrafts in East Africa (u, a); f) understand the need to respect the cultures of other ethnic groups to avoid conflicts (u, v); g) appreciate the value of cultural traditional transitional justice mechanisms in conflict resolutions in East Africa (k, v, u); h) understand the role of culture and gender in family matters. • develop an interview guide, visit nearby families, conduct a survey and write a report about the form of cultural values practiced in East Africa. • Discuss about the main cultural institutions in East Africa. • draw a table and match the traditional institutions existing in East Africa with your countries. • analyse the contribution of emerging cultural/moral youth camps in Uganda. • Draw a sketch map of East Africa, on it mark the existing cultural sites. • In groups, list the main ethnic groupings in East Africa. • Using graphs, show the population levels of these ethnic groups in East Africa today. • Discuss about the importance of handcrafts in East Africa. • discuss how respect for other cultures can be useful in aspect of leadership, and can reduce the possibility of other conflicts. • In a brainstorm session, mention the importance of cultural camps like “kisakate” in Uganda. • visit a nearby community and research about the traditional methods of justice used in resolving conflicts. • compare the modern and the traditional methods of resolving community conflicts and find out which of the two is very effective in stabilising the community leadership. • Involve in a role play about gender issues in the family. Use pictures or photographs to illustrate gender roles(s). • Engage in a discussion on how the ethnic differences and clashes can be reduced in East Africa. • carry out a field visit to cultural institutions or centres in your community or an elder or a community development officer to analyse and establish the contribution of cultural institutions;
