Theme ***Temporary and permanent changes to materials*** "@OMD". TOPIC 2.3 ***MIXTURES, ELEMENTS AND COMPOUNDS*** “20 PERIODS”. Competency; The learner recognises the characteristics of mixtures and compounds. Learning Outcomes; The learner should be able to; Know how to purify a mixture, given information about the substances involved (s, k) [Learning outcome (d) from chapter Two***]; a) Know the criteria for determining whether a substance is pure or not (k, s); b) Understand that substances are either elements, mixtures or compounds (u); c) Identify different mixtures and devise ways of separating pure substances from them (u, s); d) Know that, when added together, some liquids mix while others form two layers (k). [Assignment 1] {Using over 20 different common substances, classify each as an element, a mixture or a compound}. Elements. An element is a pure substance that cannot be split or divided into two or more simpler forms by any known chemical means. There are about 104 different types of elements. These elements are further classified as Metals, Metalloids, Non-metals and Noble/Rare/Inert gases. a) Metals e.g., sodium, calcium, magnesium, aluminium etc. b) Non-metals e.g., sulphur, carbon, nitrogen etc. A metal is an element which forms positive ions by losing electrons except hydrogen. A non-metal is an element which forms negative ions by gaining electrons. An element is normally represented in chemistry by a symbol. All elements are made up of tiny particles called atoms. An atom is the smallest indivisible, electrically neutral particle of an element that can take part in a chemical reaction. A symbol of an element is one or two alphabetical letters that represents one atom of that element. Chemical symbols. A symbol is usually the first letter of the English or Latin name of the element. Elements whose symbols are derived from Latin names include: Examples; [Element] [Latin Name] [Symbol]; Sodium Natrium Na; Potassium Kalium K; Lead Plumbum Pb; Copper Cuprum Cu; Mercury Hydragyrum Hg; Silver Argentum Ag; Iron Ferrum Fe; Gold Aurum	Au. Symbols for first 20 elements; [Name of element] [Symbol of element]; 1) Hydrogen [Hi]	H; 2) Helium [Henry] He; 3) Lithium [leave]	Li; 4) Beryllium [Betty] Be; 5) Boron [bogus] B; 6) Carbon [carrying] C; 7) Nitrogen [Nitro’s] N; 8) Oxygen [oxygen] O; 9) Fluorine [for] F; 10) Neon [Neo’s] Ne; 11) Sodium [son] Na; 12) Magnesium [Mark] Mg; 13) Aluminium[allowed] Al; 14) Silicon [silly] Si; 15) Phosphorus [Phosphorous] P; 16) Sulphur [survive] S; 17) Chlorine [crawling] Cl; 18) Argon [arrogantly] Ar; 19) Potassium [possessing] K; 20) Calcium [calcium] Ca. *Find the periodic table please and get used to the symbols of the elements. More work about the periodic table will be covered in the later stages of the syllabus*. The reactivity series of metals is quite important, especially in predicting the behaviour of metals in various reactions. The reactivity series; [Element]	[Symbol]; Potassium [Possiano] K; Sodium [son,]; Calcium [come]; Magnesium [making]	; Aluminium [a]; Zinc [z] Zn; Iron [in] Fe; Tin [the] Sn; Lead [left] Pb; Hydrogen [hand]; Copper [continue] Cu; Mercury [my] Hg; Silver [silly] Ag; Gold [gold] Au. Compound. A compound is a substance which consists of two or more elements chemically combined together in a fixed ratio. A compound is formed when one element combines chemically with another element of a different type. During the formation of compounds (chemicals combination of elements), atoms of elements combine in definite proportions and energy in the form of heat, light or electricity is either released or absorbed. Generally, atoms combine to form elements and elements combine to form molecules or compounds. Many compounds have common names such as silica/sand for silicon(iv)oxide, caustic soda for sodium hydroxide, lime water for calcium hydroxide, caustic potash for potassium hydroxide etc. Chemical names are most commonly used because they are descriptive and tell the elements present in a compound. If the name of a compound ends with -ide, it contains usually only two elements e.g., chlorides such as calcium chloride containing elements calcium and chlorine, and sulphides such as zinc sulphide containing elements zinc and sulphur except hydroxides which end with –ide but contain three elements such as sodium hydroxide containing the elements sodium, oxygen and hydrogen. If the chemical name of the compound ends with –ate, the compound contains at least three elements such as calcium carbonate containing elements calcium, carbon and oxygen. If the chemical name of the compound ends with -ite, the compound contains at least three elements such as sodium sulphite containing the elements sodium, sulphur and oxygen, potassium nitrite containing the elements potassium, nitrogen and oxygen. Examples of compounds; [Compound] [Elements in the compound]; 1) Dihydrogen oxide [(Water) Hydrogen, and oxygen]; 2) Common Salt (Sodium chloride) [Sodium and chlorine]; 3) Baking powder (NaHCO₃) [Sodium, hydrogen, carbon and oxygen]; 4) Carbon dioxide [carbon, and oxygen]; 5) Calcium carbonate (limestone/marble chips) [Calcium, carbon and oxygen]; 6) Calcium oxide(lime) [Calcium and oxygen]. [Name of compound] [Formula] [Elements contained]; Water H₂O Hydrogen and oxygen; Ammonia NH₃ Nitrogen and hydrogen; Carbon dioxide CO₂ Carbon and oxygen; Sodium chloride NaCl Sodium and chlorine; Copper (II) sulphate CuSO₄ Copper, sulphur and oxygen; Potassium permanganate KMnO₄ Potassium, manganese and oxygen; Sulphuric acid H₂SO₄ Hydrogen, sulphur and oxygen; Calcium carbonate CaCO₃ Calcium, carbon and oxygen; Lead (II) nitrate Pb(NO₃)₂ Lead, nitrogen and oxygen; Oxygen gas O₂ Oxygen. Chemical formulae and molecular equations. Chemical formulae. The formula of an element or compound is the symbols and numbers which mean one molecule. An element is a substance which cannot be split up into two or more simpler substances by chemical means. All elements are made up of tiny particles called atoms. An atom is the smallest indivisible particle of an element that can take part in a chemical change. The symbol of an element is one or two letters which mean one atom of the element. A symbol is usually the first letter of the English or Latin name of the element. Molecules. A molecule is the smallest particle of an element or compound which can normally exist on its own (i.e., in a free and separate state). Substances such as water and gases consist of molecules. Some substances contain atoms of the same elements while others consist of atoms of different elements chemically combined together. Atomicity. Atomicity is the number of atoms in one molecule of the element or compound. Types of molecules. 1) A molecule with one atom is referred to as a monoatomic molecule e.g., Helium (He); Argon(Ar); Sodium(Na) etc. 2) Diatomic molecule - This consists of two atoms of the same element e.g., some common gases [Hydrogen molecule, Oxygen molecule, Chlorine molecule, Nitrogen molecule, Fluorine molecule, Bromine molecule and Iodine molecule] exist in pairs. 3) Tri-atomic molecule – This consists of three atoms of the same element e.g., O₃(Ozone). 4) Tetra-atomic molecule – This consists of four atoms of the same element e.g., P₄. 5) Polyatomic molecule - This consists of many atoms of the same element e.g., S₈. Example. Find the atomicity of the following elements in the compound. a) 4CO₂. b) 5H₂O. c) Zn(NO₃)₂. Solutions: a) Carbon atoms = 4, Oxygen atoms, 4x2 = 8. Total number of atoms = 4+8 = 12. b) Hydrogen atoms, 5x2 = 10 atoms, Oxygen atoms = 5 Total number of atoms = 10+5 =15 atoms. c) Zinc atoms = 1, nitrogen atoms = 2, and oxygen atoms, 3x2 = 6. Total number of atoms = 1+2+6 = 9 atoms. Exercise: Find the number of atoms of each element present in the following compounds. a) MgCO₃. b) Pb(OH)₄. c) Ca₃(PO₄)₂. d) (NH₄)₂CO₃. e) 2H₂SO₄. Valency. Valency is the power of an element or radical to combine with others. The valency of an element or radical is the number of hydrogen atoms which combine with or displace one atom of that element or one group of the radical. The valency tells us what number of atoms of one element will combine with a fixed number of atoms of another element to form a molecule of a compound. Elements or radicals combine with others to form compounds. Valency is defined in terms of hydrogen because hydrogen atom is taken as a standard and has a valency of one. Figure198.1.6.mixtures_elements_and_compounds_image_001.jpg. Note: The valencies of different metals and non-metals can be deduced from the periodic table; However, some metals (transition metals) of the periodic table can have random valencies and some may have 2 or more valencies. Note. If an element has variable valencies, the valency of the element in a particular compound is indicated by a roman numeral e.g., copper (II) oxide, copper (I) oxide, iron (II) hydroxide and iron (III) hydroxide. Please note that this work will be expanded in Form Two. Radicals. A radical is an atom or group of atoms that exists in several compounds but does not exist on its own, e.g., sulphate radical [SO₄²⁻]. The atoms in radicals are chemically combined together. A radical carries a charge. Radicals may be negatively or positively charged ions. Radicals behave as if though they were atoms of elements by virtue of having valencies. The reactive oxygen species are a subset of radicals. Table4.Valencies_of_common_radicals.odt. An ion is any atom or group of atoms with a positive or negative charge due to loss or gain of electrons. Positively charged ions are called cations [e.g., Na⁺], whereas negatively charged ions are called anions [e.g., Cl⁻]. Writing chemical formulae. A chemical formula is a representation showing the proportions of elements present in a chemical compound using symbols. Formulae are written using symbols and valencies of elements and radicals. a) In a chemical formula, the number written as a subscript after the symbol of an element indicates the number of atoms of that element chemically combined. Consider examples of the chemical formulae below. In water, H₂O, the two (2) represents the number of hydrogen atoms chemically combined. Therefore, water consists of two (2) hydrogen atoms and one (1) oxygen atom chemically combined together. In sulphuric acid (H₂SO₄), there are 2 atoms of hydrogen, 1 atom of sulphur and 4 atoms of oxygen chemically combined together. CaCO₃ is the chemical formula of calcium carbonate (chalk), which consists of 1 atom of calcium, 1 atom of carbon and 3 atoms of oxygen chemically combined. Note: The formulae of some common gases were established using the Avogadro’s law (we shall go into the details of this law in our form four). Figure199.1.6.mixtures_elements_and_compounds_image_002.jpg. b) For groups of atoms (radicals), a bracket is used to show that they are being considered under the same valency. Examples. In calcium nitrate, Ca(NO₃)₂, the 2 indicates that there are 2 nitrate radicals (NO₃). Both nitrogen and oxygen in nitrate are being considered under the same valency. In aluminium sulphate, Al₂(SO₄)₃, the 3 shows that there are 3 sulphate radicals (SO₄), both the sulphur and oxygen in the sulphate are being considered under the same valency. Therefore, Al₂(SO₄)₃, consists of 2 atoms of aluminium and 3 sulphate radicals. c) A number put in front of the formula of a compound indicates the number of molecules of the compound. For example, 2H₂SO₄ means two molecules of sulphuric acid, 8HNO₃ means eight molecules of nitric acid, 3CO₂ means three molecules of carbon dioxide, H₂O means one molecule of water. d) To be able to write a chemical formula, one has to know the symbol and valency of the atoms or radicals. Steps in writing chemical formula. 1) Identify from the name of the compound, the elements and radicals present e.g., in sodium chloride, there is sodium and the chloride radical. 2) Write the symbol of the element or the formula of the radical separately, beginning with the one of a metal or ammonium radical followed by a non-metal or radical. 3) Write the valencies as superscripts to the right of the symbols written separately. Compare the valencies and if the valencies are; i) The same, cancel them out and write the symbols/formula close to each other. ii) Not the same, but have a common factor, reduce them to the simplest ratio then interchange the valencies and write them as subscripts to the right of the symbol or formula of the radical. iii) Not the same and have no common factor, interchange them and write them as subscripts to the right of the symbol or formulae of the radical. Note: If the formula of the radical consists of more than one symbol, the formula must be put in brackets before the subscript is written. Never write 1 in the chemical formula. Examples. (a) To write the formula of calcium chloride. Step1 Ca Cl. Step2 Ca² Cl¹. Formula CaCl₂. (b) To write the formula of magnesium carbonate. Step1 Mg CO₃. Step2 Mg² CO₃². Formula MgCO₃. (c) To write the formula of Zinc nitrate. Step1 Zn NO₃. Step2 Zn² NO₃¹. Formula Zn(NO₃)₂. (d) To write the formula of carbon dioxide. Figure200.1.6.mixtures_elements_and_compounds_image_003.jpg. (e) To write the formula of water. Figure201.1.6.mixtures_elements_and_compounds_image_004.jpg. (f) To write the formula of iron (III) hydroxide. Step1 Fe OH. Step2 Fe³ OH¹. Formula Fe(OH)₃. Exercise. Write the chemical formulae of the following compounds: 1) Sodium Carbonate. 2) Ammonium Sulphate. 3) Copper (II) hydroxide. 4) Sodium peroxide. 5) Calcium hydrogen carbonate. 6) Potassium hydrogen carbonate. 7) Ammonium Phosphate. 8) Calcium Phosphate. 9) Iron (III) Sulphate. 10) Aluminium Sulphate. 11) Potassium hydroxide. 12) Zinc carbonate. 14) Magnesium sulphate. 15) Copper (II) oxide. 16) Potassium permanganate. 17) Calcium hydroxide. Note: There are four common peroxides (hydrogen, potassium, sodium and barium peroxides). Formulae of different complex compounds will be covered as progress is made. Chemical equations. A chemical equation represents a chemical change or reaction by means of symbols and formulae i.e., a statement that represents a chemical reaction. A chemical reaction consists of reactants and products. A word equation is written using the chemical names of the substances in the reaction. Included in a chemical equation are; Formulae of Reactants. Formulae of Products. Proportion of reactants and products. Direction of reaction. State symbols which indicate the states of matter in which the reactants and products are present. They are written to the right of the formulae and are enclosed in brackets. There are four state symbols used i.e., Solid (s), Liquid (l), Gas (g) and Aqueous (aq) which means a solution in which water is the solvent. The amount of energy evolved or absorbed during a chemical reaction is indicated in most cases. Figure202.1.6.mixtures_elements_and_compounds_image_005.jpg. Example 2: Magnesium burns in oxygen to form magnesium oxide. Magnesium + Oxygen → Magnesium Oxide. The substances on the left-hand side of the equation are called reactants and those on the right-hand side are products. The symbol + on the left of equation means “reacts with” and on the right of the equation, it means ‘and’. The arrow (→) that heads to the products, means “to form” or “to produce”. Rules for writing Balanced chemical equations. 1) On the left-hand side, write the correct formulae or symbols of reactants and on the right, write the correct formulae of products. The reactants and products are separated by an arrow pointing to the products. 2) Write the state symbol after each formula or symbol and enclose them in brackets. 3) Balance the equation by writing small whole numbers in front of one or more formulae. Adjust the number of molecules of the reactants and products to balance the number of atoms. The process of making the number and kind of atoms equal on both sides of an equation is called Balancing an equation. This is done by writing small whole numbers in front of symbols and formulae. A balanced equation therefore has equal numbers of each kind of atoms on both the reactant and product sides. At times, it is easier to balance by use of fractions of the molecule and then multiplying the denominator through the whole equation to remove the fraction. Note: When balancing a chemical equation, the formula of the compound is not altered but rather it is the number of its molecules that is adjusted. A chemical equation is not correct unless it is balanced. Examples on writing balanced equations. 1) Equations where only one product is formed (a) Sodium + oxygen → sodium oxide. Na(s) + O₂(g) → Na₂O(s). L.H.S R.H.S. Na=1 Na=2. O=2 O=1. On the left-hand side of the equation, the sodium atom is one, on the R.H.S, the sodium atoms are two. To balance the sodium atoms, insert a 2 before sodium atom on the left. The oxygen atoms on the right are balanced by inserting a 2 before sodium oxide. But this produces 4 sodium atoms on the right while the left remains with 2, therefore to balance the equation insert a 4 on sodium atom on the left. Thus, the chemical equation is: 4Na(s) + O₂(g) → 2Na₂O(s). (b) Iron + chlorine → Iron (III) chloride. Fe(s) + Cl₂(g) → FeCl₃(s). L.H.S R.H.S. Fe=1 Fe=1. Cl=2 Cl=3. On both sides of the equation there is 1 iron atom, while the chlorine atoms on the L.H.S are 2, the chlorine atoms on the R.H.S are 3. To balance the chlorine, we insert a 3 before chlorine on the L.H.S and insert a 2 before iron (III) chloride making the number of chlorine on both sides 6, then insert a 2 before iron on the L.H.S. Thus, the chemical equation is: 2Fe(s) + 3Cl₂(g) → 2FeCl₃(s). 2) Equations in which two products are formed. (a) Potassium hydroxide + carbon dioxide → potassium carbonate + water. KOH(aq) + CO₂(g) → K₂CO₃(aq) + H₂O(l) . L.H.S R.H.S. K=1 K=2. O=3 O=4. H=1 H=2. When we insert a 2 before KOH, the number of atoms become (K=2, H=2 and O=2) hence making total number of O on L.H.S = 4. Thus, the chemical equation is: 2KOH(aq) + CO₂(g) → K₂CO₃(aq) + H₂O(l). (b) Iron + hydrochloric acid → iron (II) chloride + hydrogen. Fe(s) + HCl(aq) → FeCl₂(aq) + H₂(g). L.H.S R.H.S. Fe=1 Fe=1. H=1 H=2. Cl=1 Cl=2. The number of hydrogen atoms on L.H.S =1 and on the R.H.S=2, to make the number of hydrogen balance, insert a 2 in front of hydrogen chloride. Thus, the chemical equation is: Fe(s) + 2HCl(aq) → FeCl₂(aq) + H₂(g). 3) Equations in which three products are formed. (a) Decomposition of lead (II) nitrate crystal → lead (II) oxide + nitrogen dioxide + oxygen. Pb(NO₃)₂(s) → PbO(s) + NO₂(g) + O₂(g). L.H.S R.H.S. Pb=1 Pb=1. N=2 N=1. O=6 O=5. The numbers of oxygen atoms on the L.H.S are 6 and on the R.H.S they are 5. The atoms are not even in numbers because of one oxygen atom on lead oxide. To make the oxygen atoms equal, insert a 2 in front of PbO, and another 2 in front of Pb(NO₃)₂. To make nitrogen atoms equal, insert a 4 in front of NO₂. Thus, the equation is: 2Pb(NO₃)₂(s) → 2PbO(s) + 4NO₂(g) + O₂(g). Please note that: (i) The number below and to the right of the atoms in the bracket only multiplies those atoms. Aluminium sulphate, Al₂(SO₄)₃. Al = 1 × 2 = 2. S = 1 × 3 = 3. O = 4 × 3 = 12. (ii) The number in front of the formula multiplies all the atoms in the formula. 3Al₂(SO₄)₃ means three molecules of Aluminium sulphate. Al = 1 × 2 × 3 = 6. S = 1 × 3 × 3 = 9. O = 4 × 3 × 3 = 36. Interpretation of equations. 2Mg(s) + O₂(g) → 2MgO(s). This means 2 molecules of solid magnesium reacts with 1 molecule of oxygen gas to produce 2 molecules of solid magnesium oxide. 2H₂O₂(aq) → 2H₂0(l) + O₂(g). 2 molecules of aqueous hydrogen peroxide produces 2 molecules of liquid water and gaseous oxygen. Note: Word equations are not significant and are not commonly used. For an equation to be considered correct, it must have correct formulae of reactants and products; correct state symbols and must be balanced. Exercise: 1) Write balanced chemical equations from the following word equations: (a) Sulphur + oxygen → Sulphur dioxide. (b) Aluminium + oxygen → Aluminium oxide. (c) Iron + oxygen → Iron (III) oxide. (d) Calcium + chlorine → Calcium chloride. (e) Magnesium + nitrogen → Magnesium nitride. 2) Balance the following equations: (a) KClO₃(s) → KCl(s) + O₂(g). (b) Fe(s) + O₂(g) → Fe₃O₄(s). (c) Fe(s) + Cl₂(g) → FeCl₃(s). (d) Mg(s) + CO₂(g) → MgO(s) + C(s). (e) Mg(s) + N₂(g) → Mg₃N₂(s). Principles of forming equations. To form equations, one needs to consider the different types of reactions, which include: 1) Combination reaction. This reaction occurs when two or more elements combine to form a single substance e.g., combustion of elements in air, in chlorine and reaction of metals with sulphur to form metal sulphides, and reaction of nitrogen with metals to nitrides. (i) Metal + oxygen → metal oxide. 2Mg(s) + O₂(g) → 2MgO(s). (ii) Non-metal + Oxygen → non-metal oxide. C(s) + O₂(g) → CO₂(g). (iii) Metal + sulphur → metal sulphide. Fe(s) + S(s) → FeS(s). (iv) Metal + nitrogen → metal nitride. 6Li(s) + N₂(g) → 2Li₃N(s). 2) Decomposition reaction. This reaction occurs when a compound splits up into simpler substances. (i) Metal carbonates can decompose to metal oxide and carbon dioxide on heating. ZnCO₃(s) → ZnO(s) + CO₂(g). (ii) Metal hydrogen carbonates can decompose to form metal carbonate + water + carbon dioxide on heating. Mg(HCO₃)₂(aq) → MgCO₃(s) + H₂O(g/l) + CO₂(g). (iii) Metal nitrates (Cu, Pb, Ca, Zn, and Mg) can decompose to form metal oxide + nitrogen dioxide + oxygen 2Pb(NO₃)₂(s) → 2PbO(s) + 4NO₂(g) + O₂(g). (iv) Potassium chlorate decomposes → potassium chloride + oxygen. 2KClO₃(s) → 2KCl(s) + 3O₂(g). (v) Some metal hydroxides decompose → metal oxide + water. Cu(OH)₂(s) → CuO(s) + H₂O(l). 3) Displacement reactions. This reaction occurs when one element (more reactive) takes the place of another element (less reactive) from its solution. (i) CuSO₄(aq) + Zn(s) → ZnSO₄(aq) + Cu(s). (ii) CuSO₄(aq) + Fe(s) → FeSO₄(aq) + Cu(s). (iii) 2KI(aq) + Cl₂(g) → 2KCl(aq) + I₂(aq). (iv) 2KBr(aq) + Cl₂(aq) → 2KCl(aq) + Br₂(aq). 4) Precipitation reaction (double decomposition). In this type of reaction, both compounds involved decompose and two new substances are formed by exchange of radicals. Na₂SO₄(aq) + Pb(NO₃)₂(aq) → NaNO₃(aq) + PbSO₄(s). 5) Neutralization reaction. In this reaction an acid reacts with a base (metal oxides and hydroxides) to form a salt and water only. CuO(s) + H₂SO₄(aq) → CuSO₄(aq) + H₂O(l). NaOH(aq) + HNO₃(aq) → NaNO₃(aq) + H₂O(l). 6) Acids react with carbonates and hydrogen carbonates to form a salt, water and carbon dioxide. CaCO₃(s) + 2HCl(aq) → CaCl₂(aq) + H₂O(l) + CO₂(g). NaHCO₃(s) + HNO₃(aq) → NaNO₃(aq) + H₂O(l) + CO₂(g). 7) Acids react with metals (Mg, Zn, and Fe) to liberate hydrogen gas. (i) Mg(s) + 2HCl(aq) → MgCl₂(aq) + H₂(g). (ii) Zn(s) + H₂SO₄(aq) → ZnSO₄(aq) + H₂(g). (iii) Fe(s) + H₂SO₄(aq) → FeSO₄(aq) + H₂(g). Reversible reactions. Most reactions proceed in only the forward direction until when one of the reactants or all the reactants are used up then the reaction stops. Such a reaction is known as an irreversible reaction. E.g., the reaction of Hydrogen and Oxygen to form water. H₂(g) + ½O₂(g) → H₂O(l). However, there are some reactions in which the direction of the chemical change can be reversed by changing the conditions under which the reaction is taking place. The reaction can proceed in both forward and backward directions depending on the conditions to which the reaction is subjected i.e., the products can react to form back the substances that were initially reacting. Such a reaction is known as a reversible reaction. E.g., when hydrated copper (II) sulphate is heated, the blue color of the crystals changes to white due to formation of anhydrous copper (II) sulphate. CuSO₄.5H₂O(s) (blue crystals) → CuSO₄(s) (White powder) + 5H₂O(l). However, the white anhydrous copper (II) sulphate can be turned to blue hydrated form by adding water to it drop by drop. CuSO₄(s) (white powder) + 5H₂O(l) → CuSO₄.5H₂O(s) (blue crystals). The two equations above can be written as one: CuSO₄.5H₂O(s) ↔ CuSO₄(s) + 5H₂O(l). There is a right way this arrow (↔) is written. The harber and contact processes are quite important reversible reactions. *Research and find out some other examples reversible reactions*. Exercise. 1 (a) Define the following terms: (i) Valency. (ii) Atom. (iii) Radical. (iv) Molecule. (v) Element. (b) Using symbols, valency of radical and elements, write the chemical formulae for the following compounds: 1) Iron (II) sulphate. 2) Iron (III) sulphate. 3) Calcium nitrate. 4) Aluminium sulphate. 5) Ammonium phosphate. 6) Aluminium oxide. 7) Lead (II) nitrate. 8) Potassium carbonate. 9) Calcium hydrogen carbonate. 10) Magnesium nitride. 11) Sodium oxide. 12) Calcium phosphate. 13) Sodium hydrogen sulphate. 14) Aluminium chloride. 15) Calcium hydroxide. 16) Sodium sulphite. 17) Carbon dioxide. 18) Sodium sulphate. (c) Give the chemical names for the following compounds: (i) Cu(NO₃)₂. (ii) AlCl₃. (iii) Fe(OH)₃. (iv) Mg(HCO₃)₂. (v) NaOH. (vi) CO. (vii) SO₂. (viii) H₂SO₄. (ix) (NH₄)₂CO₃. (x) AgCl. 2) Balance the following chemical equations: (a) NaOH(aq) + HNO₃(aq) → NaNO₃(aq) + H₂O(l). (b) K₂CO₃(aq) + H₂SO₄(aq) → K₂SO₄(aq) + H₂O(l) + CO₂(g). (c) KOH(aq) + H₂SO₄(aq) → K₂SO₄(aq) + H₂O(l). (d) ZnCO₃(s) + HCl(aq) → ZnCl₂(aq) + H₂O(l) + CO₂(g). (e) Ca(OH)₂(aq) + H₂SO₄(aq) → CaSO₄(aq) + H₂O(l). (f) NaOH(aq) + H₂A → Na₂A(aq) + H₂O(l). (g) Na₂CO₃(aq) + HCl(aq) → NaCl(aq) + H₂O(l) + CO₂(g). (h) MnO₂(s) + HCl(l) → MnCl₂(aq) + H₂O(l) + Cl₂(g). (i) CuO(s) + H₂(g) → Cu(s) + H₂O(l). (j) Fe(s) + H₂O(g) → Fe₃O₄(s) + H₂O(l). (k) PbO(s) + CO(g) → PbO(s) + CO₂(g). (l) Fe₂O₃(s) + CO(g) → Fe(s) + CO₂(g). (m) Fe(s) + Cl₂(g) → FeCl₃(s). (n) Na₂SO₃(s) + HCl(aq) → NaCl(aq) + H₂O(l) + SO₂(g) . (o) Pb(NO₃)₂(s) → PbO(s) + NO₂(g) + O₂(g). (p) KClO₃(s) → KCl(s) + O₂(g). (q) H⁺(aq) + CO₃²⁻(aq) → H₂O(l) + CO₂(g). (r) Na₂O₂(s) + H₂O(l) → NaOH(aq) + O₂(g). IONIC EQUATIONS: We shall cover ionic equations in senior two. But in simple terms, when the molecular equations are written using ions for the aqueous solutions*****, we obtain ionic equations. Mixture. A mixture is a substance which consists of two or more elements or compounds not chemically combined together. Or; A mixture is a substance made up of two or more elements or compounds physically combined together in any proportion. Types of mixtures. 1) Solid-solid mixtures e.g., brass, bronze, and a mixture of sand and salt. 2) Liquid-liquid mixtures e.g., a mixture of water and ethanol. 3) Gas-gas mixtures e.g., air (Nitrogen, Carbondioxide and Rare gases). 4) Solid-liquid mixtures e.g., a mixture of water and sand. 5) Liquid-gas mixtures e.g., water containing dissolved gases. Examples of mixtures; Ink, milk, paint, Sea water, air, Alloys e.g., Brass, Steal, Bronze etc. Alloys. An alloy is a uniform mixture of one metal with one or more other substances usually metals or carbon. Alloys are formed by thoroughly mixing one molten metal with another molten metal or carbon. It has been found that alloying produces a metallic substance with more useful properties than either of the original pure metals it is made from. Table5.Common_alloys_and_their_uses.odt. Differences between a mixture and a compound. Figure204.1.6.mixtures_elements_and_compounds_image_007.jpg. Solutions and crystals. [Assignment 2] {In detail, differentiate between miscible and immiscible liquids}. Miscible and immiscible liquids. Miscible liquids are liquids which mix completely e.g., water and ethanol, benzene and paraffin. Immiscible liquids are liquids which do not mix and thus form two separate layers e.g., paraffin and water, petrol and water, oil and water. Solutions. When you shake sugar with water, the sugar mixes uniformly with the water and each part of the liquid is exactly the same. Sugar is soluble and dissolves in water. The mixture of water and sugar is called a solution. 1) Solution. A solution is a uniform mixture of two or more substances (a solvent and solute(s)). Depending on the amount of solute in the solvent, solutions can be classified as unsaturated, saturated and super saturated. Unsaturated solution: This is a solution that can dissolve more solutes at a particular temperature. Saturated solution: This is a solution that cannot dissolve any more solute at that temperature in the presence of undissolved solutes. If we shake a lot of sugar with water, some of the solid dissolves but the rest does not. It settles to the bottom of the water on standing. The water cannot dissolve any more solid and the solution is said to be saturated. A saturated solution of a solute at a particular temperature is one which can dissolve no more solute. Super saturated solution: This is a solution that contains more solutes than it can hold at that temperature in the presence of undissolved solutes. 2) Solute. A solute is a dissolved substance. It can be solid, liquid or gas. 3) Solvent. A solvent is a substance which dissolves a solute. A solution in which water is the solvent is an aqueous solution. Substances that are insoluble in water may be soluble in other solvents. Rubber solution, used to mend holes in tubes of bicycles and cars, is a solution of rubber in petrol. Iodine solution, used on cuts and wounds on the body, is a solution of iodine in ethanol. 4) A suspension. A suspension is a liquid containing small particles of solid spread throughout it and which settle on standing. Examples of suspensions include: Paint – a suspension of colored substances in water or oil: Muddy water- a suspension of mud in water: A suspension of chalk dust particles in water. N.B. A suspension of a liquid in another liquid is called an emulsion and not a suspension. A suspension differs from a solution in the following ways: It contains solid particles which can be seen. Its solid particles settle on standing. Separation is by filtration which separates it into a filtrate and residue. Crystals. A crystal is a solid which consists of particles arranged in an orderly and repetitive manner. OR; A crystal is a solid that has solidified in a definite regular shape. Crystals are formed by the process of crystallization. Crystallization is the process of evaporating a solution, making it more saturated with the solutes such that the excess solutes are deposited as crystals. The solution is evaporated by either heating it or exposing it to sunlight. Crystals have the following characteristics; They have a definite shape; They have flat sides; They have sharp edges. Formation of crystals from a solution. Some solids are usually more soluble in hot solvents than in cold. When a hot saturated solution cools, some solid settles out. If the pieces of the solid have a regular shape, flat sides and sharp edges, they are called crystals. Crystals form when a cold saturated solution stands in air for some time. Part of the solvent evaporates and the rest cannot hold all the solid in solution. The excess solid settles out as crystals. The liquid left when crystals are formed from a hot solution is called the mother liquor. Experiment to show how a large crystal of hydrated copper (II) sulphate is grown. Requirements. Beaker; Glass rod; Thread; Hydrated copper (II) sulphate crystals; Procedure. Figure205.1.6.mixtures_elements_and_compounds_image_008.jpg. Dissolve some crystals of copper (II) sulphate in some water in a beaker to form a saturated solution. Choose one good crystal of hydrated copper (II) sulphate and tie a thread around it. Hang the crystal in the saturated solution of copper (II) sulphate. Leave the crystal in the solution at a constant temperature for several weeks. The crystal will continue to grow as the water evaporates from the beaker. Note: The experiment can also be done with chromium potassium sulphate 12-water (chrome alum). Water of crystallization. Water of crystallization is the definite amount of water with which some substances chemically combine when they form crystals from their solutions. The presence of water in the crystal can influence the color and shape of some crystals. When the water is removed from the crystal by simply heating, the crystal can sometimes lose its colour and shape. Crystals or substances which contain water of crystallization are hydrates and are said to be hydrated. Crystals without water of crystallization are anhydrous. E.g., anhydrous copper (II) sulphate (white powder) and anhydrous calcium chloride (white powder). They normally exist in powdery forms and not as crystals. Examples of hydrated and anhydrous substances. Figure206.1.6.mixtures_elements_and_compounds_image_009.jpg. • In groups, use a spatula to slowly add 10gms of sugar to 150cm³ distilled water and record your observations. You should discuss whether dissolving and disappearing are the same and explain your thinking. Research about the terms: solvent, solute and solution, and if necessary, revise your observations using these terms. Experiment to show that hydrated copper (II) sulphate contains water of crystallization. Requirements. Boiling tubes; Heat source; Hydrated copper (II) sulphate crystals; Delivery tube; Beaker having cold water; Experimental set up. Figure207.1.6.mixtures_elements_and_compounds_image_010.jpg. Procedure. Put some crystals of hydrated copper (II) sulphate in a boiling tube and slant it as shown above. Connect the boiling tube to a delivery tube placed in another boiling tube dipped in a beaker of cold water. Heat the crystals in the boiling tube gently. The blue colour of the crystals begins to fade and eventually turns white. This is because the water evaporates from the crystals. The water vapour is condensed in the test tube as shown above to form a liquid (water). Exchange of water takes place between some crystals and the atmosphere. Some substances absorb water from the atmosphere while some release water to the atmosphere. These substances are grouped into three as: 1) Hygroscopic substance. A hygroscopic substance is a substance that absorbs water from the atmosphere. Examples include: Anhydrous copper (II) sulphate (CuSO₄); Calcium oxide (CaO); Copper (II) oxide (CuO); Anhydrous calcium chloride (CaCl₂) and Concentrated sulphuric acid (H₂SO₄). Hygroscopic substances are used for drying gases. Hygroscopy is the process of absorbing moisture/water from the atmosphere. 2) Deliquescent substance. A deliquescent substance is a substance that absorbs water from the atmosphere and dissolves in it to form a solution. E.g., Sodium hydroxide pellets (NaOH), Potassium hydroxide pellets (KOH) and Copper (II) chloride (CuCl₂). Deliquescence is the process whereby a substance absorbs water from the atmosphere and forms a solution. All deliquescent substances are hygroscopic, but hygroscopic substances are not necessarily deliquescent. 3) Efflorescent substance. An efflorescent substance is a substance that loses its water of crystallization to the atmosphere. The process by which a substance loses its water of crystallization to the atmosphere is called efflorescence. Examples of efflorescent substances include; sodium carbonate decahydrate (Na₂CO₃.10H₂O); Sodium sulphate decahydrate (Na₂SO₄.10H₂O). Na₂CO₃.10H₂O(s) → Na₂CO₃.H₂O(s) + 9H₂O(l). Na₂SO₄.10H₂O(s) → Na₂SO₄(s)+ 10H₂O(l). When most hydrated compounds are heated, they lose their crystalline shapes as the water of crystallization escapes, become powdery and as well, their colours change. For example, when hydrated copper (II) sulphate crystals are heated, the blue crystals turn into white powder (anhydrous copper (II) sulphate) and a colorless liquid (water) condenses on the cooler parts of the test tube. CuSO₄.5H₂O(s) → CuSO₄(s) + 5H₂O(g/l). On strong heating, the white powder turns to black, producing white fumes of a gas with a choking smell. CuSO₄(s) → CuO(s) + SO₃(g). **Crystallisation will be covered in detail in the chapter of water (topic 3.2)**. Note: Water is neutral to litmus paper i.e., it has no effect on it. In the laboratory, the presence of water can be confirmed using the following chemicals; Anhydrous Cobalt (II) chloride paper. Water turns this paper from blue to pink. Anhydrous copper (II) sulphate. Water turns this chemical from white to blue. • Individually, research and then discuss in groups, the examples of elements, compounds and mixtures and list their characteristics. These might include: • Elements: made from one type of atom; • Compounds: a mixture of elements that can only be separated by chemical means; • Mixtures: made up of two or more substances that can be separated by physical means. • In groups, research and then classify substances into compounds, mixtures or elements: e.g., carbon dioxide, hydrochloric acid, sugar, air, chlorine, gold, chlorophyll, oxygen, salt plus other examples. **Simple Criteria for purity (refer to notes on states of matter)**. • In groups, plan and carry out a practical investigation to find out whether 100g of crushed ice made from distilled water melts faster or slower than crushed ice made from tap water which contains salts. Record your results in a table and discuss. **How the percentage of oxygen can be obtained**. A known volume of air (Xcm³) is passed over heated copper metal in an enclosed gas tube. The residual gas is collected and its volume measured (Ycm³). Oxygen reacts with copper but the rest of the components of air hardly do. Therefore, we can obtain volume of oxygen in air as follows; Volume of oxygen = (X-Y) cm³; Percentage of oxygen = ((X-Y) / X) * 100%; Air (nitrogen-78%, oxygen-21% (carbon dioxide, rare gases and moisture)-1%). [Assignment 3] {In detail, identify and research about how to purify different mixtures, given information about the substances that they are made of}. Separation of mixtures. Pure substances are used in homes, hospitals and school laboratories and thus the need to separate mixtures into pure components. Mixtures can be separated into their pure components by a number of physical methods depending on the properties of the components such as solubility, boiling point and magnetic properties. Separation of mixtures is important because it enables purification, isolation/extraction and identification of a substance. There are several physical processes involved in the separation of mixtures. (a) Distillation. (b) Decantation. (c) Magnetic separation. (d) Filtration. (e) Chromatography. (f) Sublimation. (g) Crystallization. (h) Use of a separating funnel. Separation of liquid mixtures. (a) Immiscible liquids. These are two or more liquids which do not form a uniform solution when mixed together in any proportion; instead, they form separate layers. These liquids are also referred to as heterogenous mixtures. The less dense liquid settles on top of the denser one. Examples include; Paraffin and water; Cooking oil and water; Petrol and water; etc. These liquids can be separated by using a separating funnel. Using a mixture of water and cooking oil as an example; Procedure. A mixture of cooking oil and water is poured into a separating funnel and allowed to settle. Cooking oil will float on top of water since it is less dense than water. Immediately the tap of the separating funnel is carefully opened, the water runs down and it is collected in a beaker. The tap is closed when the two liquids have fully been separated. Figure208.1.6.mixtures_elements_and_compounds_image_011.jpg. • Discuss what will happen when palm oil is mixed with tap water, using the terms miscible and immiscible liquids, and how you might separate them. (b) Miscible liquids. These are two or more liquids that can be mixed together in all proportions forming a uniform layer e.g., Water and ethanol; Ethanol and propanol; Petrol and diesel; Petrol and paraffin; Diesel and cooking oil; Ink and water. The uniform mixtures of two or more liquids form a homogenous mixture. They can be separated using a process called distillation. Distillation is a process of boiling a liquid to form vapour and then cooling the vapour to obtain a purer liquid. This method can be used to separate solutes from solvents and mixtures of liquids with different boiling points. Distillation is classified into two types; i) Simple distillation. This is the vaporization followed by condensation of only one liquid or many liquids with wide differences in boiling points. It is normally used during the purification of impure water. Procedure. The impure water containing sand, soil and salt is put in a distilling flask as shown in the set up below. The water is boiled using a Bunsen burner to allow the water vapour to rise. The vapour is cooled and condensed by cold water entering the Liebig condenser. The condensed vapour forms a liquid called a distillate which is collected in a conical flask. The material which remains in the distilling flask is called the residue. NB: Broken porcelain is put at the bottom of the distilling flask to allow even boiling of the impure water. Figure209.1.6.mixtures_elements_and_compounds_image_012.jpg. Separation of a mixture of ink and water by simple distillation. Procedure. Pour a mixture of ink and water into a filter flask fitted with a delivery tube to its side arm and insert a rubber bung carrying a thermometer to its top as shown below. Figure210.1.6.mixtures_elements_and_compounds_image_013.jpg. The delivery tube at the side arm is connected to an empty test tube placed in cold water (the cold water is to condense the gas vapor). Heat the mixture (ink solution) carefully and note the temperature at which the solution is boiling. As heating is continued, the water vapor escapes from the solution since its boiling point is lower and condenses in the test tube. The temperature remains steady and this will be recorded as the boiling point of water. Slightly above the steady temperature, heating is stopped as the water has been separated from the ink. The water is collected as a distillate and the ink remains in the filter flask. NB. Do not continue to heat until all the liquid has been transferred from the flask to the test tube. Stop heating shortly when the temperature remains steady. Study the setup below about another application of the simple distillation method. Figure211.1.6.mixtures_elements_and_compounds_image_014.jpg. ii) Fractional distillation. This is the vaporization followed by condensation of more than one liquid. The liquids separated by this method, usually have close/narrow different boiling points. The distillate is collected as fractions which boil at different temperatures. Application of fractional distillation. (i) Separation of liquid air into oxygen and nitrogen (large scale manufacture of Oxygen). (ii) Separation of crude oil into fractions e.g., Petrol, diesel, kerosene etc. (iii) Used in the brewing industry to produce quality drinks such as beer, whisky and distilled waragi. The principle behind separation by fractional distillation is that the liquids must have different boiling points. This method can also be used in separating ethanol and water. Separating a mixture of ethanol and water. Mix some ethanol with water and add the mixture to a distilling flask and fit the flask with a fractionating column. Heat the mixture until when it begins to boil. Ethanol having a lower boiling point of 78°C boils first leaving the water in the distillation flask. The temperature remains constant for a while as the ethanol vapor rises up the fractionating column and is condensed by the Liebig condenser forming a colorless distillate (pure ethanol). Collect the distillate formed until the thermometer records 82°C. Note: Water vapour may also try to escape but it cannot go up the fractionating column as it condenses and falls back into the distillation flask. Continue heating and again collect the distillate boiling between 95°C and 100°C, which is mainly water. A fractionating column provides a large cooling surface. The glass beads increase the surface area for condensation of the rising vapor. Anti bumping stone (broken porcelain) is added to the mixture of ethanol and water to prevent violent boiling of the mixture. Figure212.1.6.mixtures_elements_and_compounds_image_015.jpg. Separation of liquid air into oxygen and nitrogen (large scale manufacture of Oxygen). As air is a mixture of gases, it can be separated into its components through fractional distillation. Air is passed through air filters to remove dust and and other contaminants such as smoke particles. The air is then cooled/compressed in stages. During the cooling process, carbon dioxide is removed as it solidifies at a temperature of -79°C and drops from the cooled air. This step also removes water vapour from the air. The air is then passed through concentrated sodium hydroxide solution to absorb/remove any remaining carbon dioxide. 2NaOH(aq) + CO₂(g) → Na₂CO₃(aq) + H₂O(l). Air free from Carbon dioxide is now passed through Silicon (IV) oxide/silica gel to dry it, i.e., absorb any remaining water vapour. Carbon dioxide and water vapour are removed from air before it is liquefied because they solidify at low temperatures and block the apparatus/pipes. Liquefaction of air. The dry air containing nitrogen, oxygen and noble gases is now compressed at high pressures of up to 200atm, with evolution of heat and is allowed to cool by making it escape into a large space through a jet. The process of cooling is repeated several times to obtain liquid air at about -200⁰C. The liquid air is boiled and passed through a fractional distillation column/tower where it is warmed up (the bottom of the fractionating column is warmer than the upper part). Each gas starts to separate at different temperatures according to its boiling point. Nitrogen has a boiling point of -196°C (the lowest boiling point) and is distilled/boils off first while argon and oxygen with boiling points of –186°C and -183°C respectively are distilled later. The nitrogen gas will start to escape through the outlet and it is collected. The liquid oxygen will be collected in the fractionating column. Both nitrogen and oxygen collected obtain traces of noble gases. Pure oxygen is then stored under pressure in steel cylinders. Figure212.1.6.mixtures_elements_and_compounds_image_115.jpg. Figure212.1.6.mixtures_elements_and_compounds_image_125.jpg. Side effects of the process of production and mitigation. (a) Explosion of oxygen cylinders due to high pressure. This can cause other materials to ignite spontaneously/catch fire. The resulting fire can cause damage to equipment and injury to people. Mitigation can be done by: - Regular maintaince and monitoring of cylinders. - Keeping cylinders in cool areas/avoid exposure to heat. (b) Exposure to liquid oxygen can cause severe skin and eye irritations and burns. This may cause loss of vision and cancer. Mitigation can be done by: - Posting hazard and warning information in the working area. - Communicating all information on the health and safety hazards of oxygen to potentially exposed workers, for example,submerging the affected body parts in warm water. (c) Air pollution by waste gases. Acidic gases can cause acid rain which leads to crumbling of buildings, lowering of soil pH and corrosion of roofs made of iron. Mitigation can be done by: - Fitting catalytic converters in exhaust pipes of machines to convert oxides of nitrogen into nitrogen and carbon monoxide to carbon dioxide. - Neutralise the acidic gases before releasing waste gases into the atmosphere. Social benefits of the process. - Employment opportunities; thus improved income; thus better standards of living. - Development of infrastructure e.g., electricity lines, roads, hospitals, schools etc.,; Improved road network will facilitate trade hence improved income and better standards of living. Fractional distillation of crude oil. Petroleum (Crude oil) is formed by anaerobic decomposition of sea plants and animals. The oil deposits are usually found with sand and brine. Petroleum, a mixture of hydrocarbons, undergoes fractional distillation to separate it into various useful fractions based on the differing boiling points of its components. Initially, impurities, particularly sulphur compounds, are removed from the petroleum. Then, the purified petroleum is heated in a furnace until most of it vaporizes. The resulting vapor is then introduced into the bottom of a tall fractionating tower, which is divided into several compartments, with each section cooler than the one below it or hotter than the one above it. Because petroleum contains hydrocarbons of varying sizes, these fractions have different boiling points and condense at different temperatures. As the vapor rises up the fractionating tower, it encounters decreasing temperatures. This causes the components with higher boiling points to condense and collect at lower levels of the tower, while those with lower boiling points remain vaporized and rise further. In this process, the higher parts of the tower have lower temperatures, while the lower parts have higher temperatures. Consequently, lighter fractions with lower boiling points, thus more volatile, are collected at higher levels of the tower. Conversely, heavier fractions with higher boiling points, thus less volatile, are collected at lower levels of the tower. This method of fractional distillation efficiently separates petroleum into its various components, each of which has specific applications based on its properties. Figure212.1.6.mixtures_elements_and_compounds_image_215.jpg. Fractional distillation of fermented liquor. Fractional distillation is a fundamental process in the production of fermented liquors like whiskey, rum, and brandy. It begins with the fermentation of sugars present in raw materials such as grains, sugarcane, or fruits. During fermentation, yeast converts these sugars into alcohol and carbon dioxide. Following fermentation, the resulting liquid, known as the "wash" or "mash," undergoes distillation in a still. The wash is heated, causing it to vaporize. These vapors are then passed through a column or series of columns in the still. Within these columns, the vapors encounter sections with decreasing temperatures. This temperature gradient causes the various components of the vapor, each with distinct boiling points, to condense at different levels. Lighter and more volatile components, such as alcohol, ascend to the top of the column and are collected as the distillate. Meanwhile, heavier components, including water and certain flavor compounds, may remain at lower levels or be separated out. The collected distillate may undergo further distillation or processing to refine its flavor, aroma, and alcohol content. This additional processing contributes to creating a more concentrated and refined alcoholic beverage. In summary, fractional distillation serves as a vital step in the production of fermented liquors, facilitating the separation of alcohol from other components of the wash and resulting in a more concentrated and flavorful final product. Separation of solid-liquid mixtures. The methods used to separate solid-liquid mixtures include; Crystallization; Solvent extraction; Filtration; Decantation. Examples of mixtures which can be separated by the above methods include: Sand mixed with salt solution; Sand and water; Chalk dust mixed with water. a) Crystallization/Evaporation. This is a separation technique by which crystals of a solute are obtained from a solution by evaporating a saturated solution followed by cooling at room temperature. I.e., the solution is made more and more saturated by evaporating it so that the excess solutes are deposited as crystals. Separation of a mixture of sand and salt. Procedure. Water is added to a mixture of sand and salt in a beaker and the mixture shaken thoroughly. The salt dissolves leaving behind the sand. Pour the resultant mixture into a filter funnel containing a filter paper. The salt solution will pass through the filter into a beaker as the sand particles are retained on the filter paper as a residue. The salt solution is then transferred into an evaporating dish/basin and heated to evaporate water from the solution until the salt crystals begin to form. The hot solution with the few crystals is removed from the heat source and allowed to cool so that complete crystallization can take place. The crystals formed are filtered from the mother solution and dried between filter papers. Figure213.1.6.mixtures_elements_and_compounds_image_016.jpg. NB: Direct heating of the evaporating dish is not a good way of removing excess water since it can result into the salt crystals jumping out of the dish. Note: Common salt can be obtained from rock salt (a mixture of rock and sodium chloride (common salt)) using the fractional crystallisation method. When water is added to impure rock salt, common salt dissolves forming a solution while the insoluble impurities remain. These impurities are filtered off and the remaining solution is evaporated to dryness where water evaporates leaving pure common salt behind. • Having been informed that rock salt is a mixture of rock which is insoluble in water and salt which is soluble in water, in groups, plan and implement a procedure to separate the rock from the salt. Use the following terms to explain your method: filtration, dissolve, soluble, solute, and solution. • Use your experience of evaporation to plan a procedure to separate the solute from the solvent (water) and so recover the salt by crystallisation. • You can use a digital camera to take images to show the stages of separating rock and salt, and then purifying the salt by crystallisation. Note: A mixture of sugar and salt can also be separated by the crystallisation method. Procedure. Dissolve both solutes in ethanol. Only sugar will dissolve while the salt will not. Filter the solution formed and obtain salt as the residue. Evaporate the filtrate to obtain sugar. Fractional crystallization. This is a method of separating a mixture by repeated partial crystallization of the solution. The principle behind the separation is the different solubilities of the solutes in the same solvent. In fractional crystallization, a mixture of two solutes (e.g., salts) with different solubilities is dissolved in a minimum amount of a hot solvent to make a saturated solution. The solution is then allowed to cool and as it cools, the less soluble salt crystallizes out (forms crystals). On filtration, the more soluble salt remains in the filtrate. The crystals are again dissolved in a minimum amount of hot solvent and cooled again to form crystals. The process is repeated until pure crystals of less soluble solutes are separated from the mixture. In other words, as the hot solution cools, the solutes with different solubilities form crystals at different temperatures. Examples of mixtures separated by this method: 1) Sodium carbonate and sodium hydrogen carbonate; 2) Potassium chloride and potassium chlorate. b) Solvent extraction. This method can be used to separate solutes from a solution in which more than one solute is dissolved. E.g., a solution containing iodine and sodium chloride dissolved in water. Solvent extraction works on two principles: One solute in the solution must be more soluble in the extracting solvent and the extracting solvent must not be miscible with the solvent in which the solutes are dissolved. Separation of iodine from a solution containing iodine and sodium chloride using ethoxyethane as the extracting solvent. Procedure. A mixture of iodine and sodium chloride solution is poured into a separating funnel. Ethoxyethane solvent is added on to the mixture and the stopper placed on top of the funnel. The funnel is then shaken and the mixture left to settle. Figure214.1.6.mixtures_elements_and_compounds_image_017.jpg. The ethoxyethane layer is less dense and settles on top. Iodine being more soluble in the ethoxyethane solvent than in water passes into the ethoxyethane leaving sodium chloride in the water solvent. c) Filtration. This is a process of separating a solid from a liquid or solution by use of a filter that holds back the solid but allows the liquid to pass/trickle through. The liquid that passes through a filter during filtration is called a filtrate while the solid that remains in the filter is the residue. This method is used to separate a soluble component from an insoluble component. Example: Separation of a mixture of sand and common salt. Place a mixture of sand and salt in a beaker and add enough water to dissolve. Stir the mixture with a stirring rod until all the salt dissolves. Filter the mixture and collect the filtrate (salt solution) in the evaporating dish. Evaporate the salt solution to dryness. The sand remains on the filter paper as the residue. Figure215.1.6.mixtures_elements_and_compounds_image_018.jpg. d) Decantation. This is the separation of a solid-liquid mixture by allowing the solid to settle at the bottom of the container followed by careful pouring out/off the liquid to another container. The solids being denser will settle at the bottom of the beaker while the liquid remains on top as it is less dense than solid. Figure216.1.6.mixtures_elements_and_compounds_image_019.jpg. Note: Sometimes, the solid particles may be very tiny and may take time to settle at the bottom, therefore, separation by decantation may be very difficult. For such a mixture, the solids can be made to settle faster at the bottom of the container by using a centrifuge. A centrifuge is a machine that speeds up the process of sedimentation (settling of solids). During centrifuging, test tubes containing the mixture are spun at a very high speed and the solids are thrown at the bottom of the test tubes. Separation by decantation can then be possible. Figure217.1.6.mixtures_elements_and_compounds_image_020.jpg. Separation of solid mixtures. The components present in the solid mixtures determine the method one should use. The commonly employed methods are sublimation, use of a magnet and chromatography. a) Sublimation. This is the direct change of a solid to a gas when heated without passing through the liquid state. For this method to work, one of the components must be able to sublime. Volatile solids (substances that under undergo sublimation) can also be separated from their solution by the sublimation method. Examples of volatile solids include iodine crystals, ammonium chloride, anhydrous iron (III) chloride, anhydrous aluminium chloride and benzoic acid. Therefore, any solid mixture with one of the above can be separated by sublimation. Separation of a mixture of Ammonium chloride and Sodium chloride. Requirements. Evaporating dish; Heat source; Funnel and filter paper; Mixture of Ammonium chloride and sodium chloride. Figure218.1.6.mixtures_elements_and_compounds_image_021.jpg. Procedure. A mixture of ammonium chloride and sodium chloride is poured into an evaporating dish and covered with a filter paper having holes. An inverted funnel is placed on the filter paper. The mixture is heated, first gently and then strongly to drive off the ammonium chloride. The ammonium chloride vapour passes through the holes in the filter paper and condenses on cool parts of the funnel. Separating a mixture of sodium chloride and iodine. Procedure. A mixture of equal amounts of iodine and common salt (sodium chloride) is placed in a beaker with a glass filter funnel inverted over its top. The beaker is then heated gently. Observation. Iodine solids sublime forming a purple vapor that settles at the inside of the filter funnel forming purple-black solids of iodine. White common salt is left in the Pyrex beaker. Figure219.1.6.mixtures_elements_and_compounds_image_022.jpg. b) Use of magnet. The use of a magnet is possible if one of the components in the mixture is diamagnetic or ferromagnetic i.e., has the ability to be attracted or repelled by a magnet on close contact. Diamagnetic substances are repelled by a magnetic field, while ferromagnetic substances are attracted to a magnetic field. Iron, nickel and cobalt, along with alloys like steel, are all examples of ferromagnetic materials. The following are examples of solid mixtures that can be separated by use of a magnet; Sulphur and iron fillings; Copper and zinc oxide; Cobalt and copper (II) sulphate crystals; Sugar and iron fillings. Separation of iron-sulphur mixture by use of a bar magnet. A bar magnet is dipped into the iron-sulphur mixture in a container and rubbed thoroughly throughout the mixture. The iron fillings are attracted to the magnet and pulled out leaving behind the sulphur. Figure220.1.6.mixtures_elements_and_compounds_image_023.jpg. Figure221.1.6.mixtures_elements_and_compounds_image_024.jpg. Note: Chemically the mixture of iron fillings and sulphur can be separated by use of carbon disulphide. Sulphur dissolves in carbon disulphide leaving iron fillings to settle at the bottom. Filter the mixture to obtain iron. Warm the solution of sulphur in carbon disulphide to evaporate it and collect sulphur crystals. c) Chromatography. Chromatography means ‘colour writing’. This is the process of separation of colored substances by using their different rates of movement over a porous medium (adsorbent medium). The adsorbent medium should be stationary and porous. This method is heavily employed in the separation of: Ink components; Plant pigments; Dyes; Paints; Amino acids, etc. There are three common types of chromatography used in the separation of liquid mixtures and these are; Paper chromatography; Thin layer chromatography; Column chromatography. Paper chromatography. In this type of chromatography, a filter is used as the porous medium (e.g., filter paper) over which the different components move. The dyes (colored substances) separated by this method should be soluble in the solvent and should be absorbed to some extent by the stationary medium (adsorbent medium). The pigment (dye) that is more soluble in the solvent is less absorbed (has less tendency to stick to the paper) and therefore moves faster. The dye that is less soluble has a great tendency of being absorbed and travels a very short distance. This chromatography is mainly used to separate the different components in ink. The dyes are moved over the paper at different rates by a solvent. The components are separated into bands called a chromatogram. Example: Separating the solutes in black ink. Lay a filter paper flat on the rim of an evaporating basin or small dish. Using a pipette add one drop of black ink to the center of the paper. Wait until the ink stops spreading and then add a second drop. Wait until the ink dries, leaving a ring of coloured solutes. Add one drop of water (solvent) to the middle of the coloured ring. The water spreads and moves the solutes. Wait until the water is almost dry and add a second drop. Continue until a disc of coloured substances almost reaches the edge of the paper. As the solvent (water) moved across the filter paper, it carried along with it the different dyes in black ink and separated them. The dyes separated because they have different solubilities in water and are absorbed to different degrees by the porous filter paper. Yellow was the most soluble in water and least absorbed by the filter paper and therefore, travelled the longest distance. Green was least soluble in water and most absorbed by the filter paper and therefore, travelled the shortest distance. The dried paper with separate discs of coloured solutes obtained is called a chromatogram. Each band represents a component separated from the rest. A locating agent can be used to expose colourless spots in a chromatogram. The ratio of distance moved by the solute (dye) to the distance moved by the solvent in chromatography is called, the retention factor. The identity of a component in the mixture can be deduced by comparing the retention factor value obtained in the chromatogram with existing retention factor values of known substances. Figure222.1.6.mixtures_elements_and_compounds_image_025.jpg. In chromatography, there are two phases; Stationary phase. This is the filter. Mobile phase. This is the solvent in which the different components can dissolve. Alternative procedure for separating components in black ink. Paper chromatography can also be demonstrated when a filter paper is placed vertically in a chromatography tank. Procedure. Mark a spot on a strip of filter paper using black ink. Suspend the filter paper with its tip in a beaker containing ethanol as shown below. Figure223.1.6.mixtures_elements_and_compounds_image_026.jpg. Figure224.1.6.mixtures_elements_and_compounds_image_027.jpg. After some time, the filter paper was removed from the solvent (ethanol) and allowed to dry. The chromatogram of the different components of black ink was obtained. A chromatogram is the paper that shows the different components (colors) of the mixture separated from each other. The solvent (ethanol) moves up the filter paper and dissolves the colored components in the black ink, then moves with them. The colored components moved upwards at different rates, depending on their solubility in the ethanol. The most soluble component (yellow) moved the greatest distance as it was less absorbed by the filter paper and vice versa. N.B. If two or more mixtures are separated using the same chromatographic paper, the components which are common in both mixtures travel the same distance. Consider the chromatogram of mixtures A, B, C and D (which are all different mixtures) shown below. Figure225.1.6.mixtures_elements_and_compounds_image_028.jpg. Importance of chromatography. It is used in the purification of drugs. It is used in the purification of food. It used to separate pigments from plants. Exercise. 1) James wants to separate the liquid from the dye in black ink. He uses this apparatus to distill the liquid. Figure226.1.6.mixtures_elements_and_compounds_image_029.jpg. Copy the diagram and add to it a thermometer in a correct position to measure the boiling point of the liquid which distilled over first. a) Why was ice put in the beaker around the test tube. b) The black dye in ink was thought to have a boiling point of either 54˚C, 93˚C or 150˚C. James collected the first liquid in the test tube and found that its boiling point was 100˚C. The liquid was colourless. State with a reason which of the three temperatures is the boiling point of the dye in the black ink. c) James tested another black ink to see if more than one color was present in it. He made chromatograms by placing drops of the liquid to be tested on a pencil line drawn on a filter paper. He stood the paper vertically in a suitable solvent for some hours. The figure below shows the chromatogram of some known dyes. It also shows the chromatogram of the black ink. Figure227.1.6.mixtures_elements_and_compounds_image_030.jpg. i) Which dyes are present in the black ink. ii) Suggest why the starting line is drawn in pencil. • In groups, plan and carry out investigations, using the scientific method to purify named impure substances and formally write up investigations individually. Techniques: • Physical separation e.g., Sulphur and iron filings; • Dissolving, filtration, and crystallization, e.g., salt and sand; • Distillation of a solution and fractional distillation, with particular references to the fractional distillation of crude oil, liquid air and fermented liquor. • In groups, carry out chromatography using some common dyes/inks and then: • interpret chromatograms; • Develop and apply knowledge of paper chromatography in explaining results; • Research and use locating agents in chromatography of colorless compounds. In groups discuss, research and agree on explanations of their observations. Individually record results and conclusions; 
