An element is a pure substance that cannot be split or divided into two or more simpler forms by any known chemical means. There are about 104 different types of elements. These elements are further classified as Metals, Metalloids, Non-metals and Noble/Rare/Inert gases. Is it true that a metal is an element which forms positive ions by losing electrons except hydrogen while a non-metal is an element which forms either negative or positive ions by gaining electrons?; 
An element is normally represented in chemistry by a symbol. All elements are made up of tiny particles called atoms. An atom is the smallest indivisible, electrically neutral particle of an element that can take part in a chemical reaction. A symbol of an element is one or two alphabetical letters that represents one atom of that element. Is it true that not all symbols are derived from latin names?; 
A chemical symbol is usually the first letter of the English or Latin name of the element. Elements whose symbols are derived from Latin names include: Sodium, Natrium, Na: Potassium, Kalium, K: Lead, Plumbum, Pb: Copper, Cuprumm, Cu: Mercury, Hydragyrum, Hg: Silver, Argentum, Ag: Iron, Ferrum, Fe: Gold, Aurum, Au. Is sulphur the 15th element of the periodic table?;
The reactivity series of metals is quite important, especially in predicting the behavior of metals in various reactions. Jane says the metal reactivity series is as follows: K, Na, Ca, Mg, Al, Zn, Fe, Sn, Pb, H, Cu, Hg, Ag, Au. She adds that though Hydrogen is a non-metal, it is usually added in the series as a reference element. Could her answer be mostly correct?;
A compound is a substance which consists of two or more elements chemically combined together in a fixed ratio. A compound is formed when one element combines chemically with another element of a different type. During the formation of compounds, atoms of elements combine in definite proportions and energy in the form of heat, light or electricity is either released or absorbed. Generally, atoms combine to form elements and elements combine to form molecules or compounds. Many compounds have common names such as caustic soda for potassium hydroxide, lime water for aqueous calcium hydroxide, caustic potash for potassium hydroxide etc. Is there any false statement?;
Chemical names are most commonly used because they are descriptive and tell the elements present in a compound. If the name of a compound ends with -ide, it contains usually only two elements e.g., chlorides such as calcium chloride containing elements calcium and chlorine, and sulphides, except hydroxides which end with –ide but contain three elements such as sodium hydroxide containing the elements sodium, oxygen and hydrogen. Is the last statement, mostly true?;
If the chemical name of the compound ends with –ate, the compound contains at least three elements such as calcium carbonate containing elements calcium, carbon and oxygen. If the chemical name of the compound ends with -ite, the compound contains at least three elements such as sodium sulphite containing the elements sodium, sulphur and oxygen, potassium nitrite containing the elements potassium, nitrogen and oxygen. Is there any false statement?;
An element is a substance which cannot be split up into two or more simpler substances by chemical means. An atom is the smallest indivisible particle of an element that can take part in a chemical change. A molecule is the smallest particle of an element or compound which can normally exist on its own. Substances such as water and gases consist of molecules. Some substances contain atoms of the same elements while others consist of atoms of different elements chemically combined together. Are these statements, mostly correct?;
Atomicity is the number of atoms in one molecule of the element or compound. A molecule with one atom is referred to as a monoatomic molecule e.g., ozone. A diatomic molecule consists of two atoms of the same element e.g., helium. A tri-atomic molecule consists of three atoms of the same element e.g., lead. A tetra-atomic molecule consists of four atoms of the same element e.g., P₄. A polyatomic molecule consists of many atoms of the same element e.g., S₈. Could there be only two false statements?;
Valency is the power of an element or radical to combine with others. The valency of an element or radical is the number of hydrogen atoms which combine with or displace one atom of that element or one group of the radical. Valency is defined in terms of hydrogen because hydrogen atom is taken as a standard and has a valency of one. The valencies of different metals and non-metals can be deduced from the periodic table. Is it true that some metals, the transition metals, of the periodic table can have random valencies and some may have 2 or more valencies?;
A radical is an atom or group of atoms that exists in several compounds but does not exist on its own. The atoms in radicals are chemically combined together. A radical carries a charge. Radicals may be negatively or positively charged ions. Radicals behave as if though they were atoms of elements by virtue of having valencies. The reactive oxygen species are a subset of radicals. An ion is any atom or group of atoms with a positive or negative charge due to loss or gain of electrons. Positively charged ions are called anions, whereas negatively charged ions are called cations. Are all the statements, true?;
The formula of calcium chloride is CaCl₂. Magnesium carbonate is MgCO₃. Carbon dioxide is CO. Water is H₂O. Sodium peroxide is Na₂O₂. Barium peroxide is Ba₂O₂. There are four common peroxides, i.e., hydrogen, potassium, sodium and barium peroxides. Are there false statements?;
Included in a chemical equation are: Formulae of Reactants. Formulae of Products. Proportion of reactants and products. Direction of reaction. State symbols which indicate the states of matter in which the reactants and products are present. They are written to the right of the formulae and are enclosed in brackets. There are four state symbols used i.e., Solid (s), Liquid (l), Gas (g) and Aqueous (aq) which means a solution in which water is the solvent. The amount of energy evolved or absorbed during a chemical reaction is indicated in most cases. Are there false statements?;
Word equations are not significant and are not commonly used. For an equation to be considered correct, it must have correct formulae of reactants and products, correct state symbols and must be balanced. Most reactions proceed in only the forward direction until when one of the reactants or all the reactants are used up then the reaction stops. Such a reaction is known as an irreversible reaction. E.g., the reaction of Hydrogen and Oxygen to form water. Are there false statements?;
There are some reactions in which the direction of the chemical change can be reversed by changing the conditions under which the reaction is taking place. The reaction can proceed in both forward and backward directions depending on the conditions to which the reaction is subjected i.e., the products can react to form back the substances that were initially reacting. Such a reaction is known as a reversible reaction. E.g., the harber process and contact process. Is the last statement false?;
A mixture is a substance which consists of two or more elements or compounds not chemically combined together. Solid-solid mixtures include brass, bronze, and a mixture of sand and salt. Liquid-liquid mixtures include a mixture of water and ethanol. Gas-gas mixtures include air. Solid-liquid mixtures include a mixture of water and sand. Liquid-gas mixtures include water containing dissolved gases. Are all the statements true?; 
An alloy is a uniform mixture of one metal with one or more other substances usually metals or carbon. Alloys are formed by thoroughly mixing one molten metal with another molten metal or carbon. It has been found that alloying produces a metallic substance with more useful properties than either of the original pure metal it is made from. Brass is an alloy of copper and tin. Are there 2 false statements?;
Miscible liquids are liquids which mix completely e.g., water and ethanol, benzene and paraffin. Immiscible liquids are liquids which do not mix and thus form two separate layers e.g., paraffin and water, petrol and water, oil and water. Solutions. When you shake sugar with water, the sugar mixes uniformly with the water and each part of the liquid is exactly the same. Sugar is soluble and dissolves in water. The mixture of water and sugar is called a solution. Are all the statements true?;
An aqueous solution is a solution in which water is the solvent. Depending on the amount of solute in the solvent, solutions can be classified as unsaturated, saturated and super saturated. An unsaturated solution is one that can dissolve more solutes at a particular temperature. A saturated solution is one that cannot dissolve any more solute at that temperature in the presence of undissolved solutes. A super saturated solution is one that contains more solutes than it can hold at that temperature in the presence of undissolved solutes. Is it only the last 3 statements that are false?; 
A solute is a dissolved substance. It can be solid, liquid or gas. A solvent is a substance which dissolves a solute. Substances that are insoluble in water may be soluble in other solvents. Rubber solution, used to mend holes in tubes of bicycles and cars, is a solution of rubber in petrol. Iodine solution, used on cuts and wounds on the body, is a solution of iodine in ethanol. Is it true that a solution in water is called an aqueous solution?;
A suspension is a liquid containing small particles of solid spread throughout it and which settle on standing. Examples of suspensions include: Paint – a suspension of colored substances in water or oil: Muddy water- a suspension of mud in water: A suspension of chalk dust particles in water. A suspension of a liquid in another liquid is called an emulsion and not a suspension. A suspension is separated by filtration into a filtrate and residue. Is it only the second last statement that is false?;
A crystal is a solid which consists of particles arranged in an orderly and repetitive manner/A crystal is a solid that has solidified in a definite regular shape. Crystals are formed by the process of crystallization. Crystallization is the process of evaporating a solution, making it more saturated with the solutes such that the excess solutes are deposited as crystals. The solution is evaporated by either heating it or exposing it to sunlight. Could all the 4 statements be true?; 
Some solids are usually more soluble in hot solvents than in cold. When a hot saturated solution cools, some solid settles out. If the pieces of the solid have a definite/regular shape, flat sides and sharp edges, they are called crystals. Crystals form when a cold saturated solution stands in air for some time. Part of the solvent evaporates and the rest cannot hold all the solid in solution. The excess solid settles out as crystals. The liquid left when crystals are formed from a hot solution is called the mother liquor. Could there be just one wrong statement?; 
Water of crystallization is the definite amount of water with which some substances chemically combine when they form crystals from their solutions. The presence of water in the crystal can influence the color and shape of some crystals. When the water is removed from the crystal by simply heating, the crystal can sometimes lose its colour and shape. Crystals or substances which contain water of crystallization are hydrates and are said to be hydrated. Crystals without water of crystallization are anhydrous and normally exist in powdery forms and not as crystals. Are all these statements mostly correct?;
Exchange of water takes place between some crystals and the atmosphere. Some substances absorb water from the atmosphere while some release water to the atmosphere. A hygroscopic substance is a substance that absorbs water from the atmosphere. Examples include: Hydrated CaCl₂, CaO and Concentrated H₂SO₄. Hygroscopy is the process of absorbing moisture/water from the atmosphere. Are all these statements true?;
A deliquescent substance is one that absorbs water from the atmosphere and dissolves in it to form a solution e.g., sodium hydroxide pellets. Deliquescence is the process whereby a substance absorbs water from the atmosphere and forms a solution. An efflorescent substance is one that loses its water of crystallization to the atmosphere. The process in which a substance loses its water of crystallization to the atmosphere is called efflorescence. Examples of efflorescent substances include sodium carbonate decahydrate. Are all these statements true?;
When most hydrated compounds are heated, they lose their crystalline shapes as the water of crystallization escapes, become powdery and as well, their colours change. For example, when hydrated CuSO₄ crystals are heated, the blue crystals turn into white powder and a colorless liquid, water condenses on the cooler parts of the test tube. On strong heating, the white powder turns to black, producing white fumes of a gas with a choking smell. Are all these statements false?;
A known volume of air, Xcm³ is passed over heated copper metal in an enclosed gas tube. The residual gas is collected and its volume measured, Ycm³. Oxygen reacts with copper but the rest of the components of air hardly do. Could such an experiment be used to obtain the percentage of oxygen in air?;
Pure substances are used in homes, hospitals and school laboratories and thus the need to separate mixtures into pure components. Mixtures can be separated into their pure components by a number of physical methods depending on the properties of the components such as solubility, boiling point and magnetic properties. Separation of mixtures is important because it enables purification, isolation/extraction and identification of a substance. Could one of the last two statements be false?;
Which of the following is used to separate a mixture of Paraffin and water? (a) Distillation (b) Use of a separating funnel (c) Magnetic separation (d) Filtration (e) Chromatography (f) Sublimation (g) Crystallization (h) Decantation;
Which of the following is used to separate heterogenous mixtures? (a) Distillation (b) Magnetic separation (c) Use of a separating funnel (d) Filtration (e) Chromatography (f) Sublimation (g) Crystallization (h) Decantation;
Which of the following is used to separate immiscible liquids? (a) Distillation (b) Magnetic separation (c) Filtration (d) Use of a separating funnel (e) Chromatography (f) Sublimation (g) Crystallization (h) Decantation;
Which of the following is used to separate impure water? (a) Simple distillation (b) Magnetic separation (c) Filtration (d) Use of a separating funnel (e) Chromatography (f) Fractional distillation (g) Crystallization (h) Decantation;
Which of the following is used to separate a mixture of ink and water? (a) Magnetic separation (b) Simple distillation (c) Filtration (d) Use of a separating funnel (e) Chromatography (f) Fractional distillation (g) Crystallization (h) Decantation;
Which of the following is used to separate a mixture of ethanol and water? (a) Magnetic separation (b) Simple distillation (c) Fractional distillation (d) Use of a separating funnel (e) Chromatography (f) Filtration (g) Crystallization (h) Decantation;
Which of the following is used to separate liquid air into oxygen and nitrogen? (a) Magnetic separation (b) Simple distillation (c) Use of a separating funnel (d) Fractional distillation (e) Chromatography (f) Filtration (g) Crystallization (h) Decantation;
Which of the following is used to separate crude oil into fractions? (a) Fractional distillation (b) Simple distillation (c) Use of a separating funnel (d) Magnetic separation (e) Chromatography (f) Filtration (g) Crystallization (h) Decantation;
Which of the following is used in the brewing industry to produce quality drinks such as beer, whisky and distilled waragi? (a) Fractional distillation (b) Simple distillation (c) Use of a separating funnel (d) Magnetic separation (e) Chromatography (f) Filtration (g) Crystallization (h) Decantation;
In summary, air is filtered to remove contaminants: It is then cooled in stages. Carbon dioxide is removed as it solidifies at a temperature of -79°C. The cooling step also removes water vapour from the air. The air is passed through NaOH to remove any remaining CO₂: Dried with silicon dioxide to absorb any remaining water vapor: Compressed at high pressure, cooled, and liquefied: Fractional distillation of the liquid air separates nitrogen first at -196°C, then argon and oxygen at -186°C and -183°C respectively. Nitrogen and oxygen are collected with traces of noble gases. Pure oxygen is then stored in steel cylinders. Is it true that there are only three wrong steps?;
Large scale manufacture of oxygen may result to: Explosion of oxygen cylinders due to high pressure: Exposure to liquid oxygen which can cause severe skin and eye irritations and burns: And, air pollution by waste gases. The process however provides employment opportunities, thus improved income, thus better standards of living. The process also results to development of infrastructure e.g., electricity lines, roads, hospitals and schools. Improved road network forexample, will facilitate trade hence improved income and better standards of living. Could all these statements be true?; 
Which of the following is used in the separation of petroleum into various useful fractions? (a) Fractional distillation (b) Simple distillation (c) Use of a separating funnel (d) Magnetic separation (e) Chromatography (f) Filtration (g) Crystallization (h) Decantation;
Which of the following is a fundamental process in the production of fermented liquors like whiskey, rum, and brandy? (a) Simple distillation (b) Fractional distillation (c) Use of a separating funnel (d) Magnetic separation (e) Chromatography (f) Filtration (g) Crystallization (h) Decantation;
Which of the following is not often used in the separation of solid-liquid mixtures? (a) Solvent extraction (b) Crystallization (c) Fractional distillation (d) Decantation;
Which of the following is often used in the separation of a mixture of sand and salt? (a) Solvent extraction (b) Decantation (c) Fractional distillation (d) Crystallization;
Which of the following is often used when obtaining common salt from rock salt? (a) Evaporation (b) Decantation (c) Solvent extraction (d) Fractional distillation;
Is it true that a mixture of sugar and salt can be separated by the crystallisation method?;
Which of the following is often used in the separation of a mixture of Sodium carbonate and sodium hydrogen carbonate? (a) Solvent extraction (b) Decantation (c) Fractional crystallization (d) Crystallization;
Which of the following is often used in the separation of a mixture of Potassium chloride and potassium chlorate? (a) Solvent extraction (b) Decantation (c) Crystallization (d) Fractional crystallization;
Fractional crystallization is a method of separating a mixture by repeated partial crystallization of the solution. Could the principle behind the separation be the different solubilities of the solutes in different solvents?;
Solvent extraction can be used to separate solutes from a solution in which more than one solute is dissolved. It works on two principles: One solute in the solution must be more soluble in the extracting solvent and the extracting solvent must not be miscible with the solvent in which the solutes are dissolved. Can this method be used to separate iodine from a solution containing iodine and sodium chloride using ethoxyethane as the extracting solvent?;
Filtration is a process of separating a solid from liquid or solution by use of a filter that holds back the solid but allows the liquid to pass/trickle through. The liquid that passes through a filter during filtration is called a filtrate while the solid that remains in the filter is the residue. This method is used to separate a soluble component from an insoluble component. Is it true that only one of these statements are wrong?;
Which of the following is often used in the separation of a mixture of sand and common salt? (a) Solvent extraction (b) Filtration alone (c) Crystallization alone (d) Filtration, followed by crystallization;
Decantation is the separation of a solid-liquid mixture by allowing the solid to settle at the bottom of the container followed by careful pouring out/off the liquid to another container. The solids being denser will settle at the bottom of the beaker while the liquid remains on top as it is less dense than solid. Sometimes, the solid particles may be very tiny and may take time to settle at the bottom, therefore separation by decantation may be very difficult. For such a mixture, the solids can be made to settle faster at the bottom of the container by using a centrifuge. Could there be any false statement?;
A centrifuge is a machine that speeds up the process of sedimentation. During centrifuging, test tubes containing the mixture are spun at a very high speed and the solids are thrown at the bottom of the test tubes. Separation by decantation can then be possible. Could this be generally right?;
Which of the following can't be used in the separation of solid mixtures? (a) Chromatography (b) Sublimation (c) Use of a separating funnel (d) Magnetic separation;
Sublimation is the direct change of a solid to a gas when heated without passing through the liquid state. For this method to work, one of the components must be able to sublime. Volatile solids/substances that undergo sublimation can also be separated from their solution by the sublimation method. Are all these statements true?; 
Which of the following is often used in the separation of Ammonium chloride and Sodium chloride? (a) Sublimation (b) Chromatography (c) Use of a separating funnel (d) Magnetic separation;
Which of the following is often used in the separation of Ammonium chloride and Sodium chloride? (a) Chromatography (b) Sublimation (c) Use of a separating funnel (d) Magnetic separation;
A mixture of equal amounts of iodine and common salt to be separated is placed in a beaker with a glass filter funnel inverted over its top. The beaker is then heated gently. Iodine solids sublime forming a purple vapour that settles at the inside of the filter funnel forming purple-black solids of iodine. White common salt is left in the Pyrex beaker. Is the observation wrong?; 
The use of a magnet is possible if one of the components in the mixture is diamagnetic/ferromagnetic i.e., has the ability to be attracted or repelled by a magnet on close contact. Diamagnetic substances are repelled by a magnetic field, while ferromagnetic substances are attracted to a magnetic field. Iron, nickel and cobalt, along with alloys like steel, are all examples of ferromagnetic materials. Solid mixtures that can be separated by use of a magnet include: Sulphur and iron fillings, Cobalt and iron fillings, Sugar and iron fillings. Could there be a false statement?; 
Which of the following is often used in the separation of the iron-sulphur mixture? (a) Use of a bar magnet (b) Sublimation (c) Use of a separating funnel (d) Chromatography;
Chromatography means ‘colour writing’. This is the process of separation of coloured substances by using their different rates of movement over a porous/adsorbent medium. The adsorbent medium should be stationary and porous. This method is heavily employed in the separation of: Ink components, Plant pigments, Dyes, Paints, and Amino acids. Are all the statements true?; 
Which of the following is not a common type of chromatography? (a) Paper chromatography (b) Thin layer chromatography (c) Column layer chromatography (d) Column chromatography;
Paper chromatography separates coloured substances on a porous filter e.g., a filter paper, based on their solubility in a solvent. The more soluble components are less absorbed by the adsorbent medium and thus travel further. This chromatography is mainly used to separate the different components in ink. The dyes are moved over the paper at different rates by a solvent. The components are separated into bands called a chromatogram. Are there more than 3 right statements?;
Each band of a chromatogram, represents a component separated from the rest. A locating agent can be used to expose colourless spots in a chromatogram. The ratio of distance moved by the solute/dye to the distance moved by the solvent in chromatography is called, the retention factor. The identity of a component in the mixture can be deduced by comparing the retention factor value
obtained in the chromatogram with existing retention factor values of known substances. Could atleast one of these statements be false?; 
In chromatography, there are two phases: The stationary phase, which is the solvent in which the different components can dissolve and the mobile phase, which is the filter. If two or more mixtures are separated using the same chromatographic paper, the components which are common in both mixtures travel the same distance. Chromatography is used in the purification of drugs and in the purification of food. It can also be used to separate pigments from plants. Could atmost one of these statements be false?;
