The atmosphere is a layer of air surrounding the earth. Air is a mixture of gases. Its composition varies at different times and in different places. Air is a mixture and not a compound because: It can be made by mixing nitrogen and oxygen and its formation is not accompanied by energy changes. The nitrogen and oxygen, and other gases in air can be separated from each other by physical means. The properties of air are just the average of the properties of nitrogen and oxygen. The proportions of nitrogen and oxygen, and other gases in air are definite, they don't vary from place to place and from time to time. Are all the statements, right?; 
The approximate composition of air by volume is as follows: Nitrogen-78%, Oxygen-21%, Carbon dioxide-0.03%, Inert/rare/noble gases-1.0%, and Water vapour–variable, 0.5%-4.0%. Air also consists of minute quantities of other gases such as sulphur dioxide, hydrogen dioxide, carbon monoxide, traces of methane and ozone plus solid particles such as pollen grains, soot, smoke, dust particles etc., and microorganisms such as bacteria. Is oxygen, the reactive gas on which combustion, rusting and respiration depend?;
Oxygen is the reactive gas on which combustion, rusting and respiration depend. Nitrogen dilutes the oxygen and slows down the three processes. Noble gases such as helium, argon and neon are very inert. Jorginho says that the nitrogen and oxygen, and other gases in air can only be separated from each other by chemical means. Is that right?; 
When carbon dioxide is passed through lime water, the lime water turns milky. When water vapour gets into contact with anhydrous copper II sulphate, it turns it from white to blue or when water gets into contact with blue cobalt II chloride paper, it turns it to pink. When a glowing splint is lowered into a gas jar containing oxygen, the glowing splint relights. Are all those tests true?;
The atmosphere supports life in many ways. It filters off the harmful ultra violet radiations from the sun, thus protecting life. It provides oxygen needed for respiration and combustion. Nitrogen, is needed by plants. Carbon dioxide is needed for photosynthesis by green plants. Water vapour is necessary for rain formation and it provides moisture to sooth our bodies and make plants cool. Noble gases provide inert conditions for various chemical reactions. In particular, helium is used to fill balloons because its light, neon is used in electric sign boards for advertisement and argon is used in electric bulbs. Are all these gases neutral?;
Combustion is a chemical reaction in which a substance combines with air to liberate energy. When substances burn in air, they combine with oxygen of the air to form oxides, sometimes peroxides, and liberate energy. The elements can be heated on an asbestos paper or porous pot or ceramic wool or crucible or metal bottle top. Combustion can be slow, with no flame or rapid, with a flame. Is respiration, a slow combustion reaction?;
To determine the percentage by volume of oxygen in air, Maria put some copper turnings into a combustion tube fitted to two syringes. She sucked air into one of the gas syringes up to 100cm³ and plugged its mouth with cotton wool. She heated the combustion tube containing copper turnings strongly and passed the air over copper turnings, by pushing the plunger of the syringe containing air to an empty syringe, until there was no further change in the volume of air in the syringes. She then allowed the combustion tube to cool and the volume of air in the syringes was recorded. Would you expect the decrease in the volume of air to be above 30cm³?;
To determine the percentage by volume of oxygen in air, Williams put some copper turnings into a combustion tube fitted to two syringes. He sucked air into one of the gas syringes up to 100cm³ and plugged its mouth with cotton wool. Is it true that the cotton wool allows air to easily be blown from one syringe to another without the copper turnings entering the syringes?;
Ssali says that the percentage of oxygen in air can also be determined using phosphorus or even a burning candle. Should he expect a completely different percentage result from that obtained when using copper?;
A hydrocarbon is a compound containing hydrogen and carbon only. Examples of hydrocarbons include a candle, natural gas, petrol and paraffin. Is it true that when a hydrocarbon burns, water and carbon dioxide are produced as the only products?;
When a metal burns in air, there is an increase in mass. Is the increase in mass due to the fact that the metal combines with oxygen of the air to form an acidic oxide?;
Corrosion is the gradual degradation of materials, usually metals, due to chemical reactions with their environment. The reaction between metals and the atmosphere causes the metals to lose their structural properties like shape, colour, strength, etc. Is it true that examples of corrosion include the rusting of iron, the reaction of copper metal with the atmosphere to form a green solid of copper II carbonate and the reaction of aluminium with atmospheric oxygen to form aluminium oxide?;
Which of the following metals are self-protecting from corrosion? (a) Aluminium (b) Sodium (c) Copper (d) Carbon;
Some metals are self-protecting from corrosion e.g., magnesium and aluminium react with the air to form oxides which form a thin layer on the surface of the metal. These oxide coatings prevent air from reaching the metal beneath it hence the metal is protected from further corrosion. Unfortunately, iron cannot protect its self in this way. Is this because the rust formed is porous and can allow air and water to reach the metal below it causing further corrosion?;
When iron or steel wool is left in damp air for some time, the iron becomes covered with a reddish–brown substance termed as rust. The rust forms only on the outside of the metal. Rust is soft and readily drops off and then the metal below starts to rust. Is hydrated Iron II oxide, the so called rust?;
Rusting is a chemical change in which iron combines with water in the presence of air to form a reddish-brown substance. Rusting corrodes and wears off iron and reduces its strength. It is a slow process. Is the chemical formula for rust, Fe₂O₃.xH₂O?; 
Oxygen and water are necessary for rusting. Presence of dissolved salts or acids in water tend to accelerate rusting while alkaline solutions tend to slow down rusting. Will iron rust faster in a salty or acidic solution than in tap water?;
Rusting decomposes disposed iron and increases the iron content in the soil, necessary for plants. It creates and increases market for the iron manufacturing industry. Is it true that rust is also used for making paints?; 
Rusting weakens and wears the metal. It causes the metal to lose shape. It makes metals to appear dark. It increases friction in machines. It increases the maintenance costs of materials made of iron. It contaminates tinned food. Is it true that rusting can be prevented by coating iron with sodium?;
Rusting is prevented by keeping away water and air from iron. Which of the following methods cant prevent rusting? (a) Oiling/greasing the iron (b) Tarring (c) Enameling (d) Iron plating;
Rusting is prevented by keeping away water and air from iron. Which of the following methods cant prevent rusting? (a) Zinc enameling (b) Painting or tarring (c) Sacrificial protection (d) Alloying;
Which of the following processes doesn't reduce the amount of oxygen in the atmosphere? (a)Germination (b) Photosynthesis (c) Combustion (d) Respiration;
Oxygen can be prepared in the laboratory from oxygen rich compounds such as H₂O₂, KClO₃, KMnO₄, and Na₂O₂. On a large-scale, oxygen is prepared by electrolysis of NaOH and fractional distillation of liquid air. During fractional distillation of air, is it Nitrogen that distills off last?;
Nitrogen has a boiling point of -196°C, the lowest boiling point and is distilled/boils off first while argon and oxygen with boiling points of –186°C and -183°C respectively are distilled later. The nitrogen gas will start to escape through the outlet and it is collected. The liquid oxygen will be collected in the fractionating column. Both nitrogen and oxygen collected obtain traces of noble gases. Pure oxygen is then stored under pressure in steel cylinders. Is there need to remove carbon dioxide and water vapour from air before it is liquefied?;
Oxygen is a colourless, odorless and tasteless gas. It’s neutral to litmus. It’s slightly soluble in cold water. Is it denser than the air?;
Oxygen supports the burning of most metals and non-metals forming majorly basic and acidic oxides respectively. Basic oxides when dissolved in water form basic or alkaline solutions. Is it true that these alkaline solutions turn red litmus paper blue and have no effect on blue litmus paper?;
Sodium and potassium are kept under oil/paraffin since they are very reactive and react violently with both air and water. Potassium burns in oxygen with a lilac/purple flame, forming a white ash of potassium oxide. The potassium oxide dissolves in water to form an alkaline solution of potassium hydroxide. Is K₂OH, the correct formula for potassium hydroxide?;
Sodium melts and then burns in excess oxygen with a brilliant yellow flame to form a yellow solid/powder of sodium peroxide. The sodium peroxide dissolves in water forming an alkaline solution of sodium hydroxide with evolution of a colorless gas that relights a glowing splint. However, in limited oxygen supply, sodium burns with a bright yellow flame to form a white solid that dissolves in water forming an alkaline solution of sodium hydroxide only. Could the solid be Na₂O?;
Calcium burns in oxygen with a bright red flame to form white calcium oxide. The oxide slightly dissolves in water to form calcium hydroxide, which turns litmus blue. Is calcium hydroxide different from lime water?;
Magnesium burns in oxygen with a very bright white flame forming a white ash/powder of magnesium oxide. The oxide dissolves slightly in water to form an alkaline solution of magnesium hydroxide solution that turns litmus blue. Are all the statements true?;
Iron burns in oxygen with bright sparks to form blue-black beads of tri-iron tetra oxide. Janie says that the oxide dissolves in water but has no effect on litmus. Is that true?;
Lead melts into shinny beads and finally forms a yellow powder of PbO when cold. Is PbO, usually, reddish-brown when hot?;
Copper metal burns with a blue flame turning red hot, on cooling, forms a black powder of CuO. Is CuO soluble in water?;
Non-metals such as carbon, sulphur and phosphorus burn in oxygen to form acidic oxides. These oxides dissolve in water to form acidic solutions that turn blue litmus paper red and have no effect on red litmus paper. Is it true that an acid anhydride/acidic oxide, is an oxide of a non-metal that dissolves in water to form an acid/;
Carbon burns in oxygen with an orange flame and becomes red hot/makes bright sparks, but doesn’t melt, forming carbon dioxide, a colourless gas. Carbon dioxide turns calcium hydroxide milky. Is it true that carbon dioxide dissolves in water to form carbonic acid which turns red litmus pale blue?;
Sulphur melts and then burns with a bright blue flame, forming cloudy white fumes with a pungent/chocking smell. The gas formed is a mixture of sulphur dioxide and sulphur trioxide. Is it true that the sulphur dioxide and sulphur trioxide dissolve in water forming Sulphurous and Sulphuric acids respectively?;
White phosphorus burns with a very bright yellow flame forming dense white fumes. Red phosphorus burns less readily with a yellow flame. The white fumes are a mixture of P₂O₃ and P₂O₅. The oxides dissolve in water to form phosphoric and phosphorous acids respectively which turn blue litmus red. Phosphorus is kept in water because if it is in contact with air, it smoulders/burns slowly without a flame giving off white smoke. Are all these statements true?;
Oxygen is used by living things in the process of respiration. It is essential for combustion therefore providing a heat source for various activities like cooking, burning wastes etc. Oxygen when mixed with ethyne, produces a very hot flame, oxy-acetylene flame, for welding and cutting heavy metals. Oxygen is used in the manufacture of steel, i.e., removes impurities in iron during the conversion of pig iron to steel. Is a mixture of liquid oxygen and hydrogen, a powerful rocket fuel?;
A mixture of liquid oxygen and hydrogen is a powerful rocket fuel. Liquid oxygen can be used as explosives in mines when mixed with charcoal and petrol. Oxygen is used to aid breathing where the natural supply of oxygen is insufficient e.g., in high altitude flying or climbing, in sea diving and also in hospitals for patients. Is it only one statement that is false?;  
Acidic oxides are oxides of non-metals which dissolve in water to form acids. They are called acid anhydrides and include SO₂, SO₃, NO₂ and CO₂. These oxides react with alkalis to form a salt and water. E.g., carbondioxide reacts with sodium hydroxide to form sodium hydrogencarbonate and water. Is it only one statement that is false?; 
Basic Oxides are oxides of metals which react with acids to form a salt and water only. Examples of such oxides include MgO, CuO and CaO. MgO reacts with dilute HCl to produce magnesium chloride and hydrogen. CuO reacts with dilute H₂SO₄ to form CuSO₄ and water. Basic oxides dissolve in water forming alkaline solutions. Are there two false statements?; 
Amphoteric oxides are oxides which have both acidic and basic properties when they react with acids and alkalis. Examples include: Al₂O₃, ZnO and PbO. ZnO reacts with sulphuric acid to form zinc sulphate and water. Al₂O₃ reacts with hydrochloric acid forming aluminium chloride and water. Zinc oxide reacts with sodium hydroxide to form sodium zincate. Aluminium oxide reacts with sodium hydroxide forming a salt called sodium aluminate. Are all these statements true?;
Neutral oxides are oxides which have neither acidic nor basic properties. They don’t react with water to form acids and neither do they react with acids. Examples include H₂O, CO, NO and N₂O. Neutral oxides are usually lower oxides of non-metals. Is there any false statement?; 
Mixed oxides are oxides which react like a mixture of two simpler oxides. Examples include: Tri-lead tetra oxide that reacts like a mixture of PbO and PbO₂. Tri iron tetra oxide that reacts like a mixture of Fe₂O₃ and Fe₃O₄. Dinitrogen tetra oxide that reacts like a mixture of N₂O₃ and N₂O₅. Is there only one false statement?; 
Peroxides are oxides that contain twice as much oxygen as they would contain in their normal oxides. Examples include: Na₂O₂, H₂O₂, BaO₂ and K₂O₂. Peroxides, except H₂O₂, react with dilute acids to form hydrogen peroxide. Is there any false statement?; 
Electrochemical series/reactivity series is the arrangement of elements in the order of their readiness to react with other substances. The most reactive elements are placed at the top of the series and the least reactive elements are placed at the bottom. Metals which are higher in the reactivity series/more reactive metals tend to remove oxygen from the oxides of metals that are lower in the reactivity series/less reactive metals. Magnesium is more reactive than copper and therefore removes oxygen from it. Is there no false statement?;  
When potassium and sodium are freshly cut, they are silvery shiny but their surfaces rapidly tarnish in air because they react quickly with oxygen in the atmosphere to form oxides. Potassium tarnishes more rapidly than sodium, indicating that it is more reactive than sodium. When a piece of magnesium is polished, the shiny silvery surface is exposed. The surface remains shiny for some time before turning grey due to the slow reaction of the magnesium with air forming magnesium oxide, the grey coating. Magnesium is less reactive than sodium and potassium. Are there 3 wrong statements?;
Aluminium and zinc are shiny metals, although their surfaces get coated with thin layers of their respective oxides on exposure to oxygen. Aluminium and zinc react more slowly with oxygen than magnesium forming their oxides. Hence, aluminium and zinc are less reactive than magnesium. Could all the statements be true?;
Copper is a brown solid and does not react with oxygen from the atmosphere but reacts with carbondioxide and water from the atmosphere to form a green solid of CuCO₃. Copper is therefore less reactive than aluminium and zinc. Could the first statement be wrong?;
When a mixture of Mg and CuO is heated, a red glow spreads through the mixture leaving a white ash and a brown solid. Mg removes oxygen from Cu to form MgO. When a mixture of C and CuO is heated in a test tube, a brown solid is formed and a colourless gas that turns lime water milky is liberated. Carbon is therefore, more reactive than copper. Magnesium burns in carbon dioxide to form a mixture of white ash and black solid particles. Magnesium is therefore, more reactive than Carbon. Could all these statements be true?;
Air pollution is the introduction of substances in the atmosphere that directly or indirectly endanger the lives of living organisms. Air pollutants include: CO₂, a contributor to the green-house effect. CO, which is very poisonous reacting with blood and forming a stable compound, carboxyhaemoglobin, thus stopping haemoglobin from carrying oxygen. Oxides of sulphur e.g., SO₂ and SO₃, which are toxic. Oxides of nitrogen e.g., NO, NO₂ and N₂O, which are contributors to the green-house effect. Compounds of heavy metals like Pb, Hg and cadmium, which are toxic and poisonous. Radioactive particles which cause abnormalities to plant and animals as a result of mutation. Is there any false statement?;
Sources of air pollutants include: Burning of fossils such as coal, coke and oil fuel to produce oxides of carbon and sulphur, hydrogen sulphide and unburnt oil vapour. Industrial and domestic depositions that produce oxides of carbon, sulphur, sometimes methane and other heavy metals like mercury. The exhaust fumes of locomotives e.g., cars that contain carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide, nitrogen dioxide, unburnt fuel and some heavy metals like lead. Nuclear explosions that produce radioactive particles. Tobacco smoking. Natural processes like volcanic eruption. And, gases released from manure in farm land. Do all these statements make sense?;  
Atmospheric pollution causes respiratory diseases e.g., cough, lung cancer, etc. It forms fog which distracts vision and may also be poisonous. It leads to formation of acid rain due to the presence of sulphur dioxide, sulphur trioxide, carbon dioxide etc. It darkens buildings especially those painted using lead paints. It causes global warming, particularly carbon dioxide and other green-house gases like methane. Could there be just one false statement?; 