The word acid comes from the Latin Word "acidus". The other day, Mary said that the word acidus actually means bitter. Could she be telling the truth?;
When it comes to most vegetables, they always taste bitter. Could it be the bases in these vegetables that result to their bitter taste?; 
The toothpaste that we use daily to brush our teeth is a common example of an alkali. Jimmy says toothpaste is used to neutralize the acid produced by bacteria that remain in the mouth but Henry says toothpaste just works to remove dirt from the teeth. Is Henry the right guy?; 
Our teacher often said that an acid is a compound that dissolves in water to produce hydrogen ions as the only positively charged ions. But on conducting personal research, Alisha came up with a statement that an acid could also be simply defined as a proton donor. Did Alisha get her research right?;
When Mr.Muhumuza says that an acid is a proton donor, does he mean that an acid accepts hydrogen ions from a base during a neutralisation reaction?;
An acid reacts with a base to form a salt and water. Thus a base can clearly be defined as a proton acceptor. Which type of reaction is this? (a) Double decomposition (b) Double displacement/Neutralisation (c) Displacement (d) Ionic;
Which of the following is not an example of a mineral acid? (a) Sulphuric acid (b) Nitric acid (c) Lactic acid (d) Sulphurous acid;
Is it true that ethanoic acid found in vines, tannic acid in tea, citric acid found in fruits, lactic acid found in sour milk, Oxalic acid in moss, Tartaric acid in baking powder and Formic acid in bees, are all examples of organic acids;
Is there any acid with a bitter taste?; 
Are acids electrolytes when in solutions?; 
If concentrated, acids can be corrosive. Could that mean that they are colourless when concentrated?; 
Muhumuza says that acids change colours of indicators e.g., turn blue litmus paper red and have no effect on red litmus paper. Could this unserious guy be right?;
All acids ionize in water to produce hydrogen ions. Could dissolution and ionisation mean the same thing?;
How many hydrogen ions are produced from the ionisation reaction of sulphuric acid? (a) 4 (b) 2 (c) 1 (d) 3;
How many hydrogen ions are produced from the ionisation reaction of methanoic acid? (a) 4 (b) 2 (c) 1 (d) 3;
Is it true that acids react with reactive metals to liberate hydrogen gas and a salt is formed?;
Reactive metals such as potassium or sodium or calcium can’t be reacted with dilute acids, as they react violently with them, making the reaction dangerous to perform. The reactions are fast, explosive and produce a lot of heat energy which may break the apparatus. Jimmy says that since magnesium is also a very reactive metal, it shouldnt be reacted with dilute acids. Could he be right on this?;
Is it true that all metals which are considerably more electropositive than hydrogen react with acids to liberate Hydrogen which they displace directly from the acids?;
When Precious reacted pure copper with dilute sulphuric acid, no reaction took place. Her deduction was that the metals that are above hydrogen in the electrochemical series will not liberate hydrogen from acids. Is that a right deduction?;
Though above hydrogen in the reactivity series, lead does not liberate hydrogen gas with dilute acids. Peter says that lead being only slightly more electropositive than hydrogen, liberates hydrogen with only hot concentrated acids. Could for the very first time Peter be right?;
While in his Geography class, Sadat heard the chemistry teacher in a different class say that when Iron reacts with an acid, Iron II salts, not Iron III salts are formed. Could this behaviour be due to the fact that the more stable oxidation state of Iron is +3?;
When Nashibah's good son is reacting iron fillings with a dilute acid. He first stirs the fillings with ethanol or methylated spirit for several minutes, filters them and dries them. Could this be a procedure to remove the grease often found on the iron fillings?;
Fahad is really a good boy. After fully studying the reactions between acids and metals, he concluded that generally, metals higher than lead and lower than calcium in the reactivity series can be used to prepare salts on reaction with acids. He also discovered that the acid used is usually gently warmed. Could the warming of the acid be intended to prevent wastage of the acid?;
Which of the following is used as a catalyst in the reaction between zinc and dilute HCl, a very slow reaction at room temperature? (a) Iron powder (b) Vanadium V oxide (c) Manganese IV oxide (d) Copper II sulphate;
Nitrates cannot be prepared using the reaction between a metal and a dilute acid, because dilute nitric acid being an oxidizing agent, does not react with metals to liberate hydrogen gas expect magnesium. Does nitric acid liberate hydrogen with magnesium only when the acid is very concentrated?; 
When a piece of Aluminium foil is placed in a test-tube containing cold dilute hydrochloric acid or sulphuric acid, no reaction occurs. Is this due to the presence of a thin, protective layer of aluminium oxide which is formed as soon as the metal is exposed to air, preventing any reaction?;
When Acids react with carbonates and hydrogen carbonates, they liberate carbon dioxide gas, a salt and hydrogen. Is that true?;
If a piece of aluminium foil is placed in a test-tube containing a warm acid, a reaction occurs after a short while. Is this because the oxide layer dissolves in the warm acid exposing the metal which reacts with the acid?;
Nansubuga was complaining the other morning that unserious students always dissapoint. That imagine she heard Mary say that Aluminium carbonate exists. How can it not exist? Could Nansubuga be the one wrong instead?;
Abuddu says that dilute sulphuric acid reacts with calcium carbonate, barium carbonate and lead II carbonate at a very slow rate. That even the reaction between dilute hydrochloric acid and lead II carbonate is equally slow. Could this be because the resulting salts formed are insoluble and therefore tend to form coatings around the carbonates inhibiting further reactions between the carbonates and the acid?;
As usual, an acid reacts with a base to form a salt and water only. This reaction is called a neutralization reaction because the resulting solution is neutral. Museveni thinks it is right to call this a displacement reaction too. Could he be right?;
Kataha insists that a reaction between sodium hydroxide and hydrochloric acid gives sodium chloride, a salt and water, a liquid. She seems ever to get her things wrong. Could she be right this time round?;
It is true that the reaction between H₂SO₄ and PbO is not directly feasible. This and similar reactions are not directly feasible and it all comes down to the insolubility of the salts formed from such reactions. Joan says that the reaction between sodium thiosulphate and H₂SO₄ is one of the similar reactions. Could she be right?;
Does the reaction between a sulphite and an acid produce a colourless liquid that turns white anhydrous copper II sulphate blue, as one of the products?;
Acids react with sulphites readily to form bubbles of colourless gas, which has a pungent, irritating smell. Could that gas be sulphur trioxide?;
Alexander says that if one needs an acid, there are generally 3 methods to get themselves one. By the reaction between an acid anhydride and water. By displacing a weaker acid from its salt by a stronger acid. By precipitating an insoluble sulphide from a metallic salt by hydrogen sulphide. Could all the three methods be accurate?;
It is really true that the strength of an acid refers to the ease with which an acid ionizes to produce hydrogen ions. Strong acids are acids which when dissolved in water dissociate or ionize completely to produce free hydrogen ions. Weak acids partially dissociate/ionize in water. Could sulphurous acid be an example of a strong acid?;
We have always heard that an acid can either be dilute or concentrated. Christiano says that a dilute acid is one which contains a large amount of water and a very small quantity of the acid. He also insists that a concentrated acid is therefore one which contains a very large amount of acid dissolved in a little amount of water. Is this superstar guy right?;
The basicity of an acid is the number of hydrogen ions produced by one molecule of an acid when dissolved in water. A monobasic acid is an acid which dissociates to produce only one hydrogen ion when dissolved in water. A dibasic acid is an acid which ionizes to produce only two hydrogen ions from its molecule when dissolved in water. A tribasic acid is an acid which dissociates to produce only three hydrogen ions when dissolved in water. Does phosphoric acid have a basicity of 2?;
There are quite many uses of acids. Sulphuric acid forexample, is used in car batteries. Could ethanoic acid be used in the seasoning of food salads?; 
A base is a substance which reacts with an acid to form a salt and water only. Which of the following is not a base? (a) Calcium nitrate (b) Red lead (c) Quick lime (d) Tri-iron tetra oxide?;
Nabukenya, a senior two student of Kasule Highschool, asked her fellow class mates the other day whether there was anyone else who thought that a solution of a compound in water is called an alkaline solution. Not a single student in class had a similar thought to that of Nabukenya. Do you think there is a problem with the class?;   
An alkali is a base which dissolves in water to give hydroxide ions as the only negatively charged ions. Meaning, an alkali is simply a soluble base. Which of the following is not an alkali? (a) Sodium hydroxide or caustic soda (b) Potassium hydroxide or caustic potash (c) Magnesium hydroxide (d) Calcium hydroxide or lime water;
Henry's bestie told him that solutions of bases are soapy and feel greasy or slippery. That they are also bitter and turn red litmus paper to blue. She then said that bases actually do react with acids to form salt and water only. Are all her statements true?;
James says that amphoteric oxides and hydroxides react with alkalis to form their respective complexes. Which of the following is not an example of such complexes? (a) A tetra-amine aluminate complex (b) A zincate (c) A plumbate (d) A tetra-amine copper II ion complex;
Nicole is right when she says that alkalis react with ammonium salts when heated to produce ammonia gas, which has a chocking smell and turns red litmus blue. But is she really right to say that this very reaction can be used as a test for the NH₄⁺ cation in the laboratory?; 
Alkalis precipitate many insoluble metal hydroxides from solutions of their salts. Can sodium hydroxide precipitate Barium hydroxide from Barium nitrate solution?;
It is true that sodium hydroxide and potassium hydroxide are deliquescent. But could sodium hydroxide solution absorb carbon dioxide from air to form white powder of sodium carbonate?;
The strength of a base or alkali is the ease with which a base or alkali dissociates or ionizes. A strong base or alkali is one which completely dissociates or ionizes in aqueous solution. A weak base or alkali is one which partially dissociates or ionizes in an aqueous solution. Which of the following is an example of a weak base? (a) Ammonia solution (b) Quick lime (c) Lime water (d) Sodium hydroxide;
Is it all true that one could get a base by burning metals in air or by adding  water to metal/metal oxide or by heating the hydroxides, carbonates or nitrates of metals except sodium and potassium?; 
There are quite many uses of alkalis and bases. Sodium hydroxide and potassium hydroxide forexample, are used in the manufacture of soap. Magnesium hydroxide is used as an antacid to neutralize acidity in the stomach. Can calcium oxide, a base too, which is used as a drying agent for ammonia and ethanol, also be used to dry carbondioxide gas?; 
How can we know this is an acid and that is a base? Simple, we use an indicator. An indicator is a substance which shows whether a solution is acidic, alkaline or neutral. But does the colour change of the indicator depend on the strength of the acid or the base?;
The ghetto president said that some of the examples of indicators used in chemistry experiments are Litmus paper, Litmus solution, Methyl orange, Methly red, Bromothymol blue, Bromothymol red, Phenolphthalein and the Universal indicator. Was he right to add that weak acids turn litmus yellow?; 
She recalls everything. Mary never wasted a single second of her highschool days. 55 years after school, Mary still recalls that the hydroxide ions are responsible for the change of the colour of litmus paper from red to blue while the hydrogen ions are responsible for the change of blue litmus paper to red. Which of following can't be used in the place of litmus paper? (a) Litmus solution (b) Methyl green (c) Bromothymol blue (d) Methyl orange;
In the laboratory, indicators can be obtained from plant extracts especially brightly coloured flowers such as hibiscus and morning glory or red cabbage. Different plant extracts produce different colours, but each, can be used to identify whether a solution is acidic or basic. When preparing organic indicators, a non-polar solvent is used. Which of the following solvents is often used? (a) Bromine water (b) Water (c) Ethanol (d) Potassium permanganate;
Bugembe says that a universal indicator is a mixture of other simple indicators in solution. That it enables one to classify solutions into neutral, alkaline and acidic. Is he right to say that the universal indicator is the most useful indicator?;
The Kasule highschool legend used to say that the universal indicator may be available in solution or paper form. That if in solution form, one should add 2 or 3 drops of the universal indicator to test the various solutions, match the colour change of the solution to the corresponding colour on the universal indicator PH chart and record the colour change and the PH value. Does it mean that a colourless solution is acidic if it turns purple on adding the universal indicator?;
Rose knows that pH refers to the degree of alkalinity or acidity of a solution and that the pH of a solution is a number which shows the acidic or basic strength of the solution. That it can also be defined as the negative logarithm to the base ten of the hydrogen ion concentration. Are all solutions with a pH of less than 7, acidic?; 
One of the serious students in class says that a solution with the lowest pH value of 0-3 is strongly acidic whereas a solution with the highest pH value of 10–14 is strongly alkaline. He also says that when distilled water is added to an alkaline solution, the pH value decreases towards 7, making the solution less acidic. Is the gentleman all right?;
Lemon juice is acidic because it has a pH of 2.5. Toothpaste on the other hand is alkaline because it has a pH of 9.0. However, pure water has a pH of 7.0. Does it mean that pure water has neither basic nor acidic properties?;
In an experiment to measure soil pH. Janat added 100ml of distilled water to about 10g of the obtained soil samples. Thorough stirring was done to form a mixture that was left to stand for 5 minutes. After 5 minutes, a pH paper strip was dipped into the supernatant and the obtained colour matched with those on the colour chart on the back of the paper strips to determine the pH. Did Janat get any step wrong?;
pH measurements are of significance in: The soap industry. It is important to know that the final product, soap solution, is neutral. Soils which are too acidic are harmful in agriculture. This information is obtained by measuring the pH of the soil. Various drugs are prepared at given pHs which must be determined. Is addition of slaked lime to acidic soils, a right soil treatment method?;
If the soil is too acidic, it is treated with a base in order to neutralize it. In case of indigestion, one may need to neutralize the excess stomach acid with a base or an indigestion tablet/antacid tablet that contains a base. The factory wastes usually contain acids, and thus are neutralised by adding basic substances. In order to relieve the painful symptoms of a bee sting, one may need to neutralize the acid in a bee sting with a base. Bukayo says that an acidic substance is needed to to relieve the painful symptoms of a wasp sting. Does it mean that the wasp sting is also acidic?;
The human stomach contains hydrochloric acid with a pH of about 2. The acid helps to kill any germs in our stomach. However, when the stomach walls produce too much of the acid, we suffer from stomach pains and heartburn. One way to deal with this problem is to take an antacid. The problem is that Jane thinks that the main component of an antacid should be a basic substance whereas Hillary thinks it should be a neutral substance. Is Jane, right?;
