Theme ***Acids and Alkalis*** "@OMD". TOPIC 5.2 ***SALTS*** "12 PERIODS". Competency; The learner appreciates that acids and alkalis form salts. Learning Outcomes; The learner should be able to; a) Be familiar with, and be able to carry out neutralization reactions to prepare salts (k, u, s); b) Know and appreciate the uses of common salts in everyday life (k, s). Video2.Short_video_summary_on_acids_bases_and_salts.mp4. [Group Work 1] {Know and appreciate the uses of common salts in everyday life}. A salt. The word “salt” has a wider meaning in chemistry. Salts are a large family of compounds, many of which are quite different in colour. Some salts are bitter, others are sour, and others are poisonous. Some are soluble in water, some are sparingly soluble, others are insoluble. A salt is a compound formed when all the replaceable or part of the replaceable hydrogen ions of an acid has been replaced by a metal or ammonium ion. The name of the salt is derived from the acid from which it is formed. •All salts formed from sulphuric acid are called sulphates e.g., Copper (II) sulphate, Zinc sulphate, Sodium sulphate, Barium sulphate, Iron (II) sulphate, Iron (III) sulphate, Ammonium sulphate, Aluminium sulphate. •All salts derived from hydrochloric acid are called chlorides e.g., Sodium chloride, Magnesium chloride, Zinc chloride, Iron (III) chloride. •All salts derived from nitric acid are called nitrates e.g., Aluminium nitrate, Copper (II) nitrate, Sodium nitrate, Ammonium nitrate, Calcium nitrate. Types of salts. All monobasic acids form normal salts while dibasic and tribasic acids form both normal and acid salts. 1) Normal salts. A normal salt is a salt formed when all the ionizable hydrogen ions of an acid are replaced by a metallic ion or ammonium ion. i.e., these salts do not contain hydrogen ions from the acid. E.g., sodium sulphate, sodium chloride, copper (II) sulphate. In general, normal salts include chlorides, sulphates, sulphites (from sulphurous acid), nitrates, phosphates and carbonates of metals and ammonium radical. 2) Acid salts. Acid salt is a salt formed when ionizable hydrogen ions of an acid are partially replaced by a metallic ion or ammonium ion. Nitric acid and hydrochloric acid cannot form an acid salt because they contain only one replaceable hydrogen ions. Examples of acid salts include: sodium hydrogen sulphate, ammonium hydrogen sulphate, sodium hydrogen carbonate. In general, acid salts include hydrogen carbonates, hydrogen sulphates and hydrogen phosphates of metals and ammonium radical. Acid salts are formed when dibasic or tribasic acids are reacted with metal ions or ammonium ions. These acid salts behave like salts because they contain a metallic ion and a negative ion derived from an acid; They behave like acids because the negative ions are capable of further ionization to yield hydrogen ion (H⁺). Hydrochloric acid [Chloride (normal salt)]. Nitric acid (Nitrate). Carbonic acid [Carbonate (normal salt) & Hydrogen carbonate (acid salt)]. Sulphurous acid [Sulphite & Hydrogen sulphite]. Sulphuric acid [Sulphate & Hydrogen sulphate]. Phosphoric acid [Phosphate & Dihydrogen phosphate]. 3) Basic salts. A basic salt is a compound of the normal salt and a base from which its derived e.g., basic zinc chloride, Zn(OH)Cl, basic magnesium chloride, Mg(OH)Cl. Basic salts are formed when insufficient acid is present to neutralize the available base. 4) Double salts. A double salt is a combination of two normal salts. They consist of two different positive ions and one common negative ion. Most double salts contain water of crystallization loosely attached to the cations in the salt. E.g., Potassium aluminium sulphate, K₂SO₄.Al₂(SO₄)₃.24H₂O. Potassium magnesium chloride, KCl.MgCl₂.6H₂O. Ferrous ammonium sulphate, (NH₄)₂SO₄.FeSO₄.6H₂O. Hydrated salts. Hydrated salts are salts which contain water of crystallization; The water molecules are combined with the crystals. The number of water molecules varies depending on the salt. A crystalline compound containing water is hydrated and the water is sometimes called water of hydration. Some examples of hydrated salts include: Copper sulphate crystals (CuSO₄.5H₂O), Iron (II) sulphate crystals (FeSO₄.7H₂O), Magnesium sulphate crystals (MgSO₄.7H₂O), Sodium sulphate crystals (Na₂SO₄.10H₂O) and Sodium carbonate crystals (Na₂CO₃.10H₂O). When most hydrated salts are gently heated, they lose their water of crystallization; In such a process, the salts lose their crystalline nature and become amorphous (powdery). Anhydrous salts are salts which do not contain water of crystallization. Anhydrous means ‘without water’. Some examples of anhydrous salts include: Sodium chloride, Potassium chloride, Potassium nitrate, Ammonium chloride, Potassium manganate, etc. Hydrolysis of salts [pH of salts]. Normal salts are neutral (have pH of 7) except a few. Some normal salts such as potassium carbonate and sodium carbonate (Na₂CO₃) show some basic characteristics; They for example turn litmus paper blue when in aqueous solution. This is because, when they combine in water, they are hydrolysed to form a mixture of a strong alkali (completely ionized) and a weak acid (slightly ionized). The solution is therefore alkaline because the concentration of hydroxide ions is greater than that of hydrogen ions. The carbonate ions extract hydrogen ions from water to form carbonic acid, a weak acid and potassium ions extract hydroxyl ions from water to form potassium hydroxide, a strong alkali. K₂CO₃(s) + 2H₂O(l) → 2KOH(aq) + H₂CO₃(aq). Some other normal salts like NH₄Cl dissolve in water resulting in an acidic solution. NH₄Cl(s) + H₂O(l) → NH₄OH(aq) [weak alkali] + HCl(aq) [strong acid]. Although it is common practice to talk of the hydrolysis of salts, it is strictly the anion or the cation that is hydrolysed. The aqueous solution of an acid salt of a strong acid is strongly acidic owing to the concentration of hydronium ions (previously known as hydroxonium ions), H₃O⁺ produced. HSO₄⁻(aq) + H₂O(l) ↔ SO₄²⁻(aq) + H₃O⁺(aq). In contrast, the aqueous solution of an acid salt of a weak acid such as potassium ethanoate (CH₃COOK) is often alkaline. HCO₃⁻(aq) + H₂O(l) ↔ OH⁻(aq) + H₂CO₃(aq). Therefore, the behaviour of water towards salts may be classified as follows. i) No effect (insoluble salt). ii) Dissolves the salt to give a neutral solution. iii) Dissolves the salt and reacts with it to give an alkaline solution. iv) Dissolves the salt and reacts with it to give an acidic solution. Practical. Determining the pH of a salt. To 5cm³ of water in a test-tube, add half a spatula endful of salt crystals and shake to dissolve. Add 2-3 drops of the universal indicator and shake. Record the pH of the solution using a pH chart. Importance of common salts. Salts play an important role in our lives. They have health, economic, agricultural and traditional values. Many medicines are salts e.g., the iron tablets that contain FeSO₄ (sometimes called ferrous sulphate) are used to treat iron deficiency (anaemia). Epsom salts which contain hydrated magnesium sulphate relax muscles, reduce inflammation and help muscle function. Magnesium sulphate solution is the reagent used in the laboratory to distinguish between a carbonate and a hydrogen carbonate; With a carbonate, a white precipitate of magnesium carbonate is formed. Mg²⁺(aq) + CO₃²⁻(aq) → MgCO₃(s); With a hydrogen carbonate, no precipitate forms or the solution remains colourless (no observable change). A plaster of Paris is made of calcium sulphate and is used to keep broken limbs in place. Tooth paste contains tin (II) fluoride. Cement is made from rocks containing calcium carbonate. Dry cells contain ammonium chloride. Silver bromide is used in photographic films. Ammonia sulphate is a fertilizer for alkaline soils. Calcium chloride is a drying agent (anhydrous calcium chloride) and is used in the extraction of sodium. Calcium phosphate is used to prevent and to treat calcium deficiencies. Salts provide minerals such as sodium that is essential for proper functioning of nerves and muscles and is involved in the regulation of fluids in the body. Sodium also plays a role in the body’s control of blood pressure and blood volume thus a good idea to regulate one’s common salt intake in order to maintain a normal blood pressure. Calcium from salts is important in strengthening of our bones and teeth. Although meat, plants and dairy products are considered key sources for mineral salts, the essential sources of mineral salts are the mines and sea water. Natural sources of some common salts. Sodium chloride (Rock salt and sea water). Magnesium chloride (Sea water and brine of salt lakes such as the great salt). Hydrated magnesium sulphate (Epsom salts). Sodium nitrate (Chile saltpetre). Calcium carbonate (Chalk, limestone, marble). Potassium chloride (Sea water, potash and carnallite). Calcium sulphate (Gypsum). Importance of some other common salts in our homes and in industries. Sodium chloride. (i) Used as a preservative. (ii) For food seasoning. (iii) To melt ice. (iv) As hospital saline (a combination of sodium chloride and water to treat dehydration). (v) Used in the manufacture of many chemicals such as chlorine and NaOH. (vi) Used for salting out soap. Sodium carbonate. (i) Used for Softening water. (ii) Glass making. (iii) Making modern washing powders. Sodium hydrogen carbonate. (i) Used as an antacid, and in tooth paste. (ii) Baking. (iii) Removes paint and cleans materials. (iv) Used in making fireworks. (v) Used in the manufacture of sodium carbonate. (vi) Used to treat symptoms of stomach and duodenal ulcers. Calcium carbonate. (i) Neutralizes acidity in soils and water. (ii) An antacid used as a remedy for pyrosis (heartburn, a burning sensation in the upper abdomen), acid indigestion and upset stomach. (iii) Used in making cement, steel, glasses and papers. (iv) Construction industry. (v) Road construction. (vi) Plastic industry. Potassium nitrate. (i) Used as a fertilizer. (ii) Used for the removal of tree stamps. (iii) Rocket propellants. (iv) Used in fireworks. (v) Used in making gun powder. Lead chloride. (i) Used in making different ornamental glasses. (ii) Used in making white paint. (iii) Used to make ceramics. Potassium carbonate. (i) Used to soften water. (ii) Used for making soap. (iii) Used in fire extinguishers. (iv) Used as flux in glass production. Barium sulphate. (i) Used as a pest and rat poison. (ii) Used in powder coatings used for hair removal. (iii) Used in oil well drilling fields. (iv) Used in paints, paper coating, textiles then rubber. (v) Used as fillers in plastics. Sodium phosphate. (i) Used as emulsifiers (such as in processed cheese), thickening agents and leavening agents for during baked goods. (ii) Used in food and water treatment. (iii) Used to control pH of processed foods. (iv) Used in medicine for constipation and to prepare bowel for medical procedures. Ammonium chloride. (i) Used in treatment of urinary tract disorders. (ii) Used in hair shampoos. (iii) Used in cough mixtures. (iv) Used as a fertilizer. (v) Used as a food additive and a thickening agent. (vi) Used in glue that bonds plywood. (vii) Used in textile and leather industries. Copper (II) sulphate. (i) Used as a fungicide due to its ability to kill several fungi. (ii) In Benedict’s solution and in Fehling’s solution used in testing for reducing sugars. (iii) To test blood samples for diseases like anaemia. (iv) A confirmatory test for water in the laboratory setting. Ammonium carbonate. (i) Used as an emetic (an agent that causes vomiting) and an active ingredient in some cough syrups designed to relieve the symptoms of bronchitis. (ii) Used as an aqueous neutralization / alkalization agent for paper. (iii) Used in smelling salts, baking powder, fire extinguishers, ammonium casein glue, ceramics and textile dying. The use of salts in fireworks. Fireworks are primarily a combination of compounds (a fuel, an oxidizer and a binder) to provide an explosion, and metal salts are used as additives that give the different colours. A fuse is used to light gunpowder, which ignites to send the fireworks towards the sky. Potassium nitrate is one of the most components of gunpowder that propels the fireworks into the sky. Once the fireworks are in the air, more gun powder inside them causes them to explode with a bang. The colour of the fireworks depends on the metals present in the salt (calcium chloride--orange fireworks, sodium nitrate--yellow, barium chloride--green, copper (II) chloride--blue and strontium carbonate--red). • Individually, research on the use of common salts and record your results in a table and discuss in a group e.g., sodium chloride, sodium hydrogen carbonate (sodium bicarbonate), calcium carbonate, potassium nitrate, lead chloride, barium sulphate, potassium carbonate, sodium phosphate and ammonium chloride. Solubility of salts and other common compounds. The solubility of a salt has to be considered before deciding on the method of its preparation. While salts are ionic compounds, not all salts are soluble in water. When a solute dissolves in water, the result is an aqueous solution. Solubility is the amount of solute in grams required to saturate 100g of solvent (water) at a particular temperature. Solubility shouldn’t be confused with the ability to dissolve a substance, since a solution can also be formed as a result of a chemical reaction. E.g., zinc dissolves (with effervescence) in dilute hydrochloric acid as a result of a chemical reaction, releasing hydrogen gas in a displacement reaction. In such a case, the zinc ions are soluble in the acid. Water is the common solvent used and thus solubilities of substances are often based on the mass of the salt that will dissolve in a given volume of water. Solubility rules are general qualitative rules for determining the solubility of a substance at 25 degrees Celsius (room temperature) and 1atm (101.3kPa) pressure. Solubility tables often tabulate the maximum mass in grams of the solute that can be dissolved in 100ml of water. At room temperature and 1atm pressure, the density of water is 1.00g/ml i.e., 1g of water has a volume of 1ml at 25℃. Therefore, 100g of water will have a volume of 100ml at the same temperature. Thus, at 25 degrees Celsius. solubility in g/100g water = solubility in g/100ml of water. The units of solubility are g/100g of H₂O at a given temperature. For classification purposes, a solute dissolved in water at 25 degrees Celsius and 1atm is usually considered to be: i) Soluble, if more than 1.0g can be dissolved in 100ml of water. ii) Insoluble, if less than 0.1g can be dissolved in 100ml of water. iii) Slightly / sparingly soluble, if between 0.1g and 1.0g can be dissolved in 100ml of water. Basing on the solubility of a solute in water and the amount of solute that has been dissolved in water to make a solution, an aqueous solution can either be unsaturated or saturated or supersaturated. a) An unsaturated solution is one which can take up more solute at that temperature. b) A saturated solution is one which cannot dissolve any more solute at that temperature in the presence of undissolved solute; The undissolved solute is not often visible. c) A super saturated solution is a solution which contains more solute than is required to form a saturated solution at a particular temperature. The excess solute often precipitates out of the solution. Experiment. Determining the solubility of a salt. Take about 50cm³ of distilled water in a beaker and warm at 30 degrees Celsius. Add sodium chloride or potassium nitrate or any other salt powder to the water a little at a time while stirring continuously until when no more salt dissolves. The solution formed is saturated. The saturated solution in the beaker is allowed to settle so as to allow undissolved solid to separate from the solution. Weigh a clean and dry evaporating dish or watch glass and pour into it a little of the clear salt solution. Weigh the evaporating dish or watch glass with the salt solution and evaporate the solution to dryness carefully using a medium flame or on a water/sand bath (for salts that decompose easily) to avoid loss and/or decomposition of solid. Allow the solid on the evaporating dish or watch glass to cool and reweigh the dish with the dry salt. Treatment of results. Mass of empty dish = a g. Mass of dish + saturated solution = b g. Mass of dish + dry salt = c g. Calculations. Mass of saturated solution = (b-a) g. Mass of dry salt = (c-a) g. Mass of water (solvent) = (b-a)-(c-a) = b-a-c+a = (b-c) g. (b-c) g of water dissolves (c-a) g of the salt. 100g of solvent dissolves (c-a)/(b-c) *100g of NaCl. Therefore, the solubility of the salt at room temperature is (c-a)/(b-c) *100g/100g of water. Calculations. 1(a) 75g of a saturated solution of sodium chloride contains 30g of sodium chloride at 200⁰C. Calculate the solubility of sodium chloride at 200⁰C. Mass of water = mass of saturated solution-mass of solute = 75-30 = 45g. 45g of H₂O contain 30g of NaCl. 100g of H₂O contain (30 * 100)/45 g of NaCl = 66.7g / 100g of H₂O. (b) Calculate the percentage of the salt in the saturated solution. Mass of salt / Mass of saturated solution * 100 = 30/75 * 100 = 40%. 2) 12g of a saturated solution was evaporated and 4g of solid potassium nitrate was left. Calculate the solubility of sodium nitrate. Mass of water = 12-4 = 8g. 8g of H₂O contain 4g of KNO₃. 100g of H₂O contain (4 * 100)/8 g of KNO₃ = 50g/100g of H₂O. 3) 23g of potassium chlorate at 21⁰C saturated 40cm³ of water. Calculate the solubility of potassium chlorate at 21⁰C. 40g of H₂O contain 23g of KClO₃. 100g of H₂O contain (23 * 100)/40 g of KClO₃ = 57g/100g of H₂O. 4) 30g of sodium chloride crystals were dissolved in 75g of water at 80⁰C. Calculate the solubility of sodium chloride at this temperature. [40g/100 g of water]. 5) 12.0g of potassium chlorate was carefully evaporated to dryness, 2.4g of potassium chlorate crystals were left on the evaporating dish. Calculate the solubility of potassium chlorate in grams per 100g of water at room temperature. [25g/100g of water]. Solubility curves. The solubility curve of a substance is a graph showing how its solubility varies with temperature. The graph is obtained by plotting solubility (on the vertical axis) against temperature (on the horizontal axis). The solubility of some salts e.g., KNO₃, KClO₃ increase with temperature and their curves rise steeply. The solubility of some salts like NaCl and KCl change little with rise in temperature and their curves rise gently. Some compounds like CaSO₄ are less soluble in hot and cold water, their solubility curves fall gently. Figure5.solubility_curves_of_common_salts.jpg. Uses of solubility curves. • To obtain solubility of the salt at various temperatures. • To determine the temperature at which a certain mass of salt when dissolved in water, can form a saturated solution. • It can be used to explain the trend of solubility of salts. The solubility of potassium chloride, potassium nitrate and potassium chlorate increase with increase in temperature. The solubility of potassium nitrate increases most rapidly, followed by potassium chlorate then potassium chloride. The solubility of sodium chloride increases very slightly with increase in temperature. The solubility of calcium sulphate decreases with increase in temperature. • To calculate mass of salt precipitated by cooling from higher temperature to a lower temperature. Mass of salt = (solubility at a higher temperature – solubility at a lower temperature). For example, if a salt P with solubility of 180g/100g of water at 90˚C was cooled to a temperature of 30˚C where its solubility is 25g/100g of water. Calculate the mass of salt formed after cooling the solution. Mass of salt = (solubility at a higher temperature – solubility at a lower temperature) = (180-45) g = 155g. • Variation in solubility of a salt with temperature is the basis of fractional crystallization of salts. Fractional crystallization is used in the extraction of sodium carbonate and sodium chloride. Applications of solubility. • Production of fizzy drinks e.g., soda which contain carbon dioxide dissolved at high pressure and low temperatures; On opening the bottle, the gas bubbles escape out of the solution. • The aspect of differences in the solubilities of salts at different temperatures is applied in extraction of salts from large water bodies like lakes and seas. e.g., sodium chloride is extracted by fractional crystallization from lake Katwe (refer to notes on separation of mixtures). • Purification of soluble salts from a mixture by fractional crystallization. Factors that affect the rate of solubility of salts. 1) Amount of solvent. Solubility of most salts increases with increase in the amount of solvent used. E.g., more sugar or salt can dissolve if the amount of water increases. 2) Nature of solvent/solute. Solubility of a salt may increase or decrease depending on the nature of solvent or solute. E.g., sugar dissolves in water more readily than common salt. 3) Temperature. Solubility of most salts increase with increase in temperature. For example, potassium chlorate and potassium nitrate. Solubility of a few salts like calcium chloride and calcium sulphate decrease with increase in temperature. The solubility of sodium hydroxide and gases as well also decreases with increase in temperature. Salts have varying degree of solubility in water as described below. a) All group I salts are soluble in water. b) All sodium, potassium and ammonium salts are soluble in water except some complex compounds (these shall be covered in advanced levels of education). c) All nitrates are soluble in water except some complex compounds (these too shall be covered in advanced levels of education). d) All carbonates are insoluble in water except those that are for group I elements of the periodic table and ammonium carbonate. Magnesium carbonate is slightly soluble. Note: Aluminium carbonate doesn’t exist and salts of aluminium undergo hydrolysis in aqueous solutions producing oxonium ions (H₃O⁺) ions that make their aqueous solutions acidic. e) All sulphates are soluble in water except those of barium, strontium and lead. Calcium sulphate, silver sulphate and mercurous sulphate are sparingly/slightly soluble. Calcium sulphate though slightly soluble in water, is rarely precipitated in reactions between the calcium and sulphate ions. f) All chlorides, bromides and iodides are soluble in water, except those of silver, lead and mercurous mercury. Lead chloride and lead bromide are slightly soluble in cold water but more soluble in hot water. g) All oxides are insoluble in water. h) All hydroxides are insoluble in water except those of sodium, potassium and ammonium. The hydroxides of calcium, strontium and barium are moderately soluble. Magnesium hydroxide is only very slightly soluble. The rest of the hydroxides are insoluble. e) All solid hydrogen carbonates are soluble in water except sodium hydrogen carbonate which is only slightly soluble. Hydrogen carbonates of elements below magnesium in the reactivity series don’t exist. Magnesium and Calcium hydrogen carbonates exist only in solution; An attempt to isolate solid calcium hydrogen carbonate and magnesium hydrogen carbonate causes them to decompose. Sodium hydrogen carbonate is called baking soda or bicarbonate of soda since it is used as a raising agent along with tartaric acid (cream of tartar) in bread making. f) All sulphides are insoluble in water except those of ammonium, sodium, potassium, calcium, magnesium, barium and strontium. g) All phosphates and hydrogen phosphates are insoluble in water except those of sodium, potassium and ammonium. Some hydrogen phosphates such as calcium hydrogen phosphate are soluble. h) All chlorates are soluble in water. i) All acetates are soluble in water, although silver acetate may precipitate from a moderately concentrated solution. j) All arsenates are insoluble in water except those of sodium, potassium and ammonium. • In groups plan an investigation to find out the solubility of some of the following salts in water, and record the results in a table and assess solubility of sodium nitrate, barium sulphate, copper sulphate, potassium carbonate, sodium chloride and lead chloride. Salt preparation. Naturally existing salts contain a lot of impurities and it becomes very costly to obtain them in pure form. Impure salts have a lot of side effects once used and thus the need for pure salts. Pure salts, therefore, are manufactured in industries in many ways, depending on what type of salt it is. Soluble salts are usually prepared by methods which involve crystallization. They can be prepared by reacting acids with a suitable reagent. These reagents can be a metal, a carbonate, a basic oxide or an alkali. Insoluble salts are usually prepared by precipitation or double decomposition. Some salts, soluble or insoluble, can be prepared directly from their elements. The following flowchart provides a simple guide to choosing an appropriate method for preparing a salt. Figure4.choosing_an_appropriate_method_for_preparing_a_salt.jpg. Before moving on, it is really important to know the colours of the common salts just like the way you know your name. We do keep the chemistry colour chart up to date but you are required to go deeper and identify the colours of these compounds from the laboratory yourself. Below is the colour chart, I would advise you write it down on the cover of your book. Table1.Colours_of_substances.odt. [Group Work 2] {Be familiar with, and be able to carry out neutralization reactions to prepare salts}. Now that you know the colours of most salts, let's see how they are prepared. Preparing Soluble Salts. Soluble salts can be prepared by reacting an acid with an insoluble solid. The insoluble solid can be a metal, a carbonate or a base. This is done by adding an excess of solid reactant bit by bit to an aqueous acid in a beaker. The excess solid reactant ensures that the acid is completely reacted. Once the reaction is complete, excess solid can be filtered off/decanted to obtain a filtrate which is then evaporated and allowed to cool to form salt crystals. The crystals formed are then filtered out from the mother liquor [soluble salts are prepared in solution and crystallized from a saturated solution and the liquid that remains on top of the crystals after cooling is called the mother liquor], washed with distilled water and dried in an oven or under sun shine or between filter papers to obtain the salt. acid + metal → salt + hydrogen gas. acid + insoluble carbonate → salt + carbon dioxide + water. acid + insoluble base → salt + water. However, this method isn’t used to prepare all soluble salts. Laboratory preparations of salts whose carbonates and hydroxides are soluble can be prepared by titration method. Video6.Setting_up_and_Performing_a_Titration.mp4. This is done by reacting an acid with a soluble reactant through titration. The reactant can be an alkali or a soluble carbonate. acid + alkali → salt + water. acid + soluble carbonate → salt + carbon dioxide + water. Figure3.Neutralisation_reaction.jpg. Since both reactants are soluble, exact quantities of each reactant have to be used to avoid contamination of the final product. The quantities are obtained by performing titration once with a suitable indicator. An indicator is necessary to determine when the reaction is complete as the reactants used to perform titration are usually colourless. Titration is then repeated without an indicator. Note: For both methods mentioned above, a pure solid sample of the salt obtained is concentrated by evaporating water off the salt solution that is then cooled for crystals to form. During evaporation, some water is left to help in formation of the crystals (don’t evaporate to dryness). Avoid loss of too much crystals and avoid decomposition of the salt formed. Slow cooling ensures that good crystals are formed. (a) Action of an acid on a metal (Refer to notes on acids and alkalis). Practical. Preparation of Zinc sulphate crystals from zinc metal. a) Pour dilute sulphuric acid in a beaker. b) Add Zinc granules until in excess and add copper (II) sulphate solution. a catalyst, to speed up the reaction. Effervescence occurs. c) When the reaction stops, filter off the excess Zinc and evaporate the filtrate by heating in an evaporating dish until crystallization point. Dip a glass rod in the solution at regular intervals and check if crystals appear on it or pour a little hot solution in a test tube and cool under tap. shaking all the time. If crystals form, stop heating. d) The hot solution is removed from the heat source and allowed to cool for the crystals of zinc sulphate to be formed. The crystals are then filtered out and washed 2-3 times with little cold distilled water and dried by pressing them gently between two filter papers. Zn(s) + H₂SO₄(aq) → ZnSO₄(aq) + H₂(g). Practical. Preparation of iron (II) sulphate from iron and dilute sulphuric acid. • Dilute sulphuric acid is put in a beaker and warmed. • Iron fillings are added to the warm acid little at a time with constant stirring until no more can dissolve. This means that all the acid has reacted. • The undissolved iron fillings are filtered out and the green filtrate obtained is iron (II) sulphate. • The filtrate is then transferred into an evaporating dish and heated to evaporate excess water from the solution. Dip a glass rod in the solution at regular intervals and check if crystals appear on it or pour a little hot solution in a test tube and cool under tap. shaking all the time. If crystals form, stop heating. • The hot solution is removed from the heat source and allowed to cool for the crystals of iron sulphate to be formed. • The crystals are then filtered out, washed 2-3 times with little cold distilled water and dried between two filter papers. Sulphuric acid + Iron → Iron (II) sulphate + Hydrogen gas. Fe(s) + H₂SO₄(aq) → FeSO₄(aq) + H₂(g). Note: Iron fillings are greasy and don’t react easily. The grease is removed before use by stirring with ethanol or methylated spirit for several minutes. It is then filtered and dried. (b) Action of acid on an insoluble basic oxide. Practical. Preparation of copper (II) sulphate crystals from copper (II) oxide and dilute sulphuric acid. • Dilute sulphuric acid is put in a beaker and warmed gently. • Copper (II) oxide crystals are added to the warm acid little at a time with constant stirring using a glass rod until no more can dissolve. This means that all the acid has reacted / has been neutralized. • The undissolved copper (II) oxide is filtered off and a blue filtrate of copper (II) sulphate is obtained. • The filtrate is then transferred into an evaporating dish and heated to evaporate excess water from the solution. Evaporate the filtrate until crystallization point. Dip a glass rod in the solution at regular intervals and check if crystals appear on it or pour a little hot solution in a test tube and cool under tap. shaking all the time. If crystals form, stop heating. • Remove the hot solution from the heat source and allow it to cool for more crystals of copper sulphate to be formed. Filter out the crystals, wash them with little distilled cold water and dry them between filter papers. CuO(s) + H₂SO₄(aq) → CuSO₄(aq) + H₂O(l). Practical. Preparation of zinc (II) sulphate crystals from Zinc oxide and dilute sulphuric acid. • Dilute sulphuric acid is put in a beaker and warmed. • Zinc oxide is added to the warm acid little at a time with constant stirring until no more can dissolve. This means that all the acid has reacted. • The undissolved zinc oxide is filtered off and a colourless filtrate is obtained. • The filtrate is then transferred into an evaporating dish and heated to evaporate excess water from the solution. Evaporate the filtrate until crystallization point. Dip a glass rod in the solution at regular intervals and check if crystals appear on it or pour a little hot solution in a test tube and cool under tap. shaking all the time. If crystals form, stop heating. • Remove the hot solution from the heat source and allow it to cool for more crystals of zinc (II) sulphate to be formed. Filter out the crystals, wash them with little distilled cold water and dry them between filter papers. Note: The acid is warmed to increase the rate of reaction. Note: Magnesium sulphate occurs naturally in minerals such as kieserite and epsomite. The mineral can be dissolved in hot water and the purified sulphate is obtained by crystallization. However, the sulphate can also be made in the laboratory by reacting magnesium oxide with dilute sulphuric acid. (c) Preparation of salts from insoluble metal hydroxides. Preparation of lead (II) nitrate starting from lead (II) hydroxide. - Pour dilute nitric acid in a beaker and warm it gently. - Add lead (II) hydroxide a little at a time while stirring until when it is in excess. - Filter off the excess hydroxide to get a colourless filtrate. - Evaporate the filtrate by heating gently to obtain a saturated solution. Dip a glass rod in the solution at regular intervals and check if crystals appear on it or pour a little hot solution in a test tube and cool under tap. shaking all the time. If crystals form, stop heating. - Cool the saturated solution to obtain white crystals of lead (II) nitrate salts. - Wash the crystals with cold distilled water and dry them either on sun shine, in an oven or between filter papers. Pb(OH)₂(s) + 2HNO₃(aq) → Pb(NO₃)₂(aq) + 2H₂O(l). Other salts prepared in similar ways include Iron (II) nitrate, Copper (II) chloride and Zinc sulphate. Fe(OH)₂(s) + 2HNO₃(aq) → Fe(NO₃)₂(aq) + 2H₂O(l). 2HCl(aq) + Cu(OH)₂(s) →  CuCl₂(aq) + 2H₂O(l). Zn(OH)₂(s) + H₂SO₄(aq) →  ZnSO₄(aq) + 2H₂O(l). (d) Action of acid on insoluble carbonate. Note: Dilute sulphuric acid reacts with calcium carbonate, barium carbonate and lead (II) carbonate at a very slow rate as the resulting salts formed (calcium sulphate, barium sulphate and lead (II) sulphate) are insoluble and therefore, tend to form coatings around the carbonates inhibiting further reactions between the carbonates and the acid. The reaction between dilute hydrochloric acid and lead (II) carbonate also forms an insoluble salt (lead (II) chloride) which also forms coating stopping further reactions. Dilute nitric acid reacts with all carbonates to form soluble nitrate salts. Please always remember that aluminium carbonate doesn’t exist. Practical. Preparation of lead (II) nitrate crystals from lead (II) carbonate and dilute nitric acid. • Dilute nitric acid is put in a beaker and warmed. • Lead (II) carbonate crystals are added to the warm acid little at a time with constant stirring using a glass rod until no more can dissolve. During this reaction, carbon dioxide gas is evolved. Continue to add until no more crystals react, showing that all the acid has been neutralized. • The undissolved lead (II) oxide is filtered off to obtain a colourless filtrate which contains lead (II) nitrate. • The filtrate is then transferred into an evaporating dish and heated to evaporate excess water from the solution. This is done until the crystals begin to form. • The hot solution is removed from the heat source and allowed to cool for more crystals of lead (II) nitrate to be formed. • The crystals are then filtered out, washed and dried between the filter papers. Note: Lead (II) nitrate can also be prepared from lead (II) oxide and dilute nitric acid. The same procedures outlined above are followed for preparation of other salts involving the action of acid on carbonates e.g., copper (II) nitrate, iron (II) nitrate. Note: The reaction of baking powder (sodium bicarbonate) and vinegar (ethanoic acid) is a common procedure to obtain sodium ethanoate in the laboratory. For this reaction, a balloon containing one spatula endful of baking soda is fixed over the mouth of a plastic water bottle or test-tube half filled with vinegar. The baking soda is carefully emptied into the vinegar and the contents shook gently so as to mix. The balloon becomes inflated. filled with gas (its size will depend on the amount of carbon dioxide produced). NaHCO₃(s) + CH₃COOH(aq) → CH₃COONa(aq) + CO₂(g) + H₂O(l). • In groups, half-fill a plastic water bottle with vinegar and place a spatula of baking soda (sodium bicarbonate) into a balloon and fix it over the mouth of the bottle so that the baking soda mixes with the vinegar and observe and report on the reaction you observe. (e) Action of dilute acid on alkalis. Laboratory preparations of soluble salts whose carbonates and hydroxides are soluble can be prepared by titration method. This can be done by reacting an acid with a soluble reactant through titration. The reactant can be an alkali or a soluble carbonate. These salts include potassium, sodium and ammonium salts. Neutralization is a reaction between an acid and a base to produce a salt and water only. This reaction can be used to prepare common salt (sodium chloride) by a technique called titration where an acid is put in a burette and the alkali is put in a conical flask. The acid is then run to the alkalis in the conical flask by opening the tap of the burette. General procedure. - Put a known volume of an alkali or a soluble carbonate in a conical flask. - Add 2 or 3 drops of an indicator. - Run a suitable acid from the burette at intervals (a little at a time) until when the colour of the mixture just changes. Note and record the volume of acid used. - Having noted the volume of the acid used, the solution is poured away since the indicator used is part of the resultant solution and sometimes could even change the colour of the salt obtained. - The whole process is repeated. Measure accurately the same volume of hydroxide as before and titrate with exactly the same volume of acid recorded without adding the indicator. - Stir and heat the solution to make it saturated. Dip a glass rod in the solution at regular intervals and check if crystals appear on it or pour a little hot solution in a test tube and cool under tap. shaking all the time. If crystals form, stop heating. - Allow the hot saturated solution to cool as it forms salt crystals. - The crystals are filtered off, washed with cold distilled water and dried in an oven, under sunshine or gently between filter papers. Video71.preparing_soluble_salts.mp4. Video80.Running_a_titration_analysis_2.mp4. Practical. Preparation of sodium chloride from dilute hydrochloric acid and sodium hydroxide. • Fill the burette with dilute hydrochloric acid and note the level of the acid. • Pipette about 25 cm³ of sodium hydroxide and transfer it into a clean conical flask and add 2-3 drops of phenolphthalein indicator to this solution. • Then run the acid from the burette a little at a time into the sodium hydroxide solution. Shake constantly until the colour of the solution turns from pink to colourless. • Having noted the volume of the acid used, the solution is poured away since the indicator used is part of the resultant solution. • The whole process is repeated. Measure accurately the same volume of hydroxide as before and titrate with exactly the same volume of acid recorded without adding the indicator. • Transfer the colourless solution obtained into an evaporating dish and heat to evaporate the excess water until the crystals begin to form (until it is concentrated). • Remove the hot solution from the heat source, pour it in a beaker and allow it to cool for the crystals to form completely. • Filter out the crystals, wash them with little distilled water and dry them gently between filter papers. • Repeat the process of crystallization to purify the crystals. NaOH(aq) + HCl(aq) → NaCl(aq) + H₂O(l). However, sodium chloride occurs naturally in lake Katwe in Kasese district of Uganda. The lake also has potential to produce other useful salts like sodium carbonate, sodium sulphate and potassium sulphate which are removed as impurities in the process of refining salty water to produce common salt. Other salts prepared in similar ways are: Ammonium sulphate, (NH₄)₂SO₄. Potassium nitrate, KNO₃ and Sodium sulphate, Na₂SO₄. 2NH₄OH(aq) + H₂SO₄(aq)  → (NH₄)₂SO₄(aq) + H₂O(l). KOH(aq) + HNO₃(aq) → KNO₃(aq) + H₂O(l). 2NaOH(aq) + H₂SO₄(aq) → Na₂SO₄(aq) + 2H₂O(l). • Individually research the reaction between an acid and a base and explain what happens when hydrochloric acid and sodium hydroxide react and then, produce a word equation. • In groups, discuss the word equation and use symbolic representation to predict the outcome from the chemical reaction. • In groups, make magnesium sulphate by gently heating 50cm³ of diluted sulphuric acid in a beaker to 60⁰C and adding magnesium oxide powder, stirring until a milky solution is formed. Filter the solution, and the clear liquid or filtrate is magnesium sulphate solution. The water can be removed by gentle heating and evaporation. • Individually, make a record of the process based on careful observation in the form of a flow chart and create a word equation to explain the chemical reaction. Preparing insoluble salts. Salts that are insoluble in water can’t be made by any of the above methods because once they are formed during the reactions, they coat the unreacted reagents and the reaction immediately stops after a short period of time. Double decomposition (precipitation) is the method used to prepare insoluble salts i.e., salts which do not dissolve in cold water. Double decomposition means that the two compounds used in the reaction as reactants both decompose to form new compounds. Precipitation is the act of throwing down a solid (precipitate) when two aqueous solutions are mixed. During this method, two aqueous solutions are mixed and a solid called a precipitate is formed. This is done through mixing two aqueous solutions, one containing the cation of the salt and another containing the anion of the salt. One of the new salts formed is a soluble salt and one is an insoluble salt that settles at the bottom appearing as a precipitate. The resultant product mixture is then heated to enable rapid filtration. The precipitate is filtered off and purified by washing with distilled water to obtain the salt. A precipitate is an insoluble solid that separates from a solution. To use precipitation, just make sure the salt you want to make is insoluble and that the two reactants to use (which should contain part of the name of the salt of interest) are soluble and fully ionized, so that no decomposition takes place. Note however, that calcium sulphate though slightly soluble in water, is rarely precipitated in reactions between the calcium and sulphate ions. Practical. Preparation of barium sulphate (by reacting barium nitrate and sodium sulphate). • Put a solution of hot barium nitrate solution in a beaker and add a solution of hot sodium sulphate to it, stirring all the time. A white precipitate of barium sulphate immediately appears. Allow the mixture to cool. • Filter off the precipitate and wash it 2-3 times with hot distilled water to remove any acid. • Dry the precipitate (salt formed) under sun shine, in an oven or between filter papers. Ba(NO₃)₂(aq) + Na₂SO₄(aq) → BaSO₄(s) + NaNO₃(aq). Ba²⁺(aq) + SO₄²⁻(aq) → BaSO₄(s). Note: If any of the compounds to be used in the preparation of the salt is insoluble in water, it must first be made to dissolve in a mineral acid. For example, in the preparation of lead (II) sulphate using lead (II) oxide, the lead (II) oxide is first dissolved in nitric acid to form lead (II) nitrate. PbO(s) + 2HNO₃(aq) → Pb(NO₃)₂(aq) + H₂O(l). The lead (II) nitrate formed reacts with sulphuric acid to form lead (II) sulphate. Pb²⁺(aq) + SO₄²⁻(aq) → PbSO₄(s). When silver nitrate solution is added to potassium chloride solution, a white precipitate is formed. AgNO₃(aq) + KCl(aq) → KNO₃(aq) + AgCl(s). Ag⁺(aq) + NO₃⁻(aq) + K⁺(aq) + Cl⁻(aq) → K⁺(aq) + NO₃⁻(aq) + AgCl(s). Ionic equation. Ag⁺(aq) + Cl⁻(aq) → AgCl(s). When a solution of sodium hydroxide is added to a solution of zinc sulphate, a white precipitate is formed. ZnSO₄(aq) + 2NaOH(aq) → Zn(OH)₂(s) + Na₂SO₄(aq). Zn²⁺(aq) + SO₄²⁻(aq) + 2Na⁺(aq) + 2OH⁻(aq) → Zn(OH)₂(s) + 2Na⁺(aq) + SO₄²⁻(aq). Ionic equation. Zn²⁺(aq) + 2OH⁻(aq) → Zn(OH)₂(s). When sodium iodide solution is added to lead (II) nitrate solution, a yellow precipitate is formed. Pb(NO₃)₂(aq) + 2NaI(aq) → PbI₂(s) + 2NaNO₃(aq). Pb₂⁺(aq) + 2NO₃⁻(aq) + 2Na⁺(aq) + 2I⁻(aq) → PbI₂(s) + 2Na⁺(aq) + 2NO₃⁻(aq). Ionic equation. Pb₂⁺(aq) + 2I⁻(aq) → PbI(s). Preparing salts by direct combination of elements (Direct synthesis). Some salts, soluble or insoluble, can be prepared directly from their elements. This method is limited to salts consisting of two elements (binary salts) such as chlorides, bromides, iodides and sulphides. Examples. (i) Preparation of Iron (II) Sulphide. a) Add powered sulphur to iron filings in a ratio of 4:7 by mass. Ground the mixture thoroughly in a mortar and put it into a dry test-tube. b) Heat the mixture strongly in a Bunsen flame (small flame) until no further change. The mixture glows red / orange. When it does so, remove the flame and hold the test-tube over a mortar as a precaution against breakage. The red / orange glow will then spread through the whole mixture without further heating, indicating that the reaction is taking place (heat is being given out). After the reaction, a black solid is formed. Fe(s) + S(s) → FeS(s). The black sulphide on contacting air at the surface, it gets converted to Iron (III) oxide. Note: Iron fillings are greasy and don’t react easily. The grease is removed before use by stirring with ethanol or methylated spirit for several minutes. It is then filtered and dried. (ii) Preparation of anhydrous iron (III) Chloride. a) Heat the iron wire in the combustion tube strongly. b) Pass a stream of chlorine over heated iron wire in the combustion tube. The iron wire glows hot and reacts with chlorine to form an orange to brown-black solid. 2Fe(s) + 3Cl₂(g) → 2FeCl₃(s). (iii) Preparation of anhydrous iron (II) chloride. a) Dry hydrogen chloride is passed over strongly heated iron wire. b) A white anhydrous iron (II) chloride is formed. Fe(s) + HCl(g) → FeCl₂(s) + H₂(g). (iv) In the preparation of sodium chloride from sodium and chlorine, burning sodium is lowered in a gas jar of chlorine. Sodium continues to burn in chlorine forming white fumes which settle into white solids (sodium chloride). 2Na(s) + Cl₂(g) → 2NaCl(s). Other salts prepared by direct synthesis include most salt halides such as: Mg(s) + Cl₂(g) → MgCl₂(s). 2K(s) + Cl₂(g) → 2KCl(s). Zn(s) + Br₂(g) → ZnBr₂(s). • In groups use prior learning to suggest the chemical formulae of the salts (sodium chloride, calcium carbonate, potassium nitrate and potassium carbonate). Discuss how to write a simple equation to explain how they might have been made. Action of heat on salts. (a) Carbonates. Ammonium carbonate when heated decomposes to form ammonia, water vapour and carbon dioxide. (NH₄)₂CO₃(s) + Heat → 2NH₃(g) + H₂O(g/l) + CO₂(g). Potassium, sodium and lithium carbonates are very stable and are not decomposed by heat. But if the salts are gently heated, they lose their water of crystallization. In such a process, salts lose their crystalline nature and become amorphous. Na₂CO₃.10H₂O(s) (Crystalline solid) + Heat → Na₂CO₃(s) (Powdery solid) + 10H₂O(g). Lithium carbonate is not known to exist in hydrated forms. All the other metallic carbonates decompose upon heating to give the oxide of the metal and carbon dioxide gas. Metal carbonate(s) + Heat → metal oxide(s) + Carbon dioxide (g). Zinc oxide is yellow when hot and white when cold. Lead (II) oxide is reddish-brown when hot and white when cold. Copper (II) oxide is black and the other oxides are white. Carbon dioxide is a colourless gas that turns lime water milky. ZnCO₃(s) [white powder] + Heat → ZnO(s) + CO₂(g). CuCO₃(s) [green powder] + Heat → CuO(s) + CO₂(g). PbCO₃(s) [white powder] + Heat → PbO(s) + CO₂(g). Note: Hydrogen carbonates of metals decompose to form carbonates of the respective metals, carbon dioxide gas and water vapor. Ammonium hydrogen carbonate sublimes to form NH₃, CO₂ and water vapour. 2NaHCO₃(s) + Heat → Na₂CO₃(s) + H₂O(l) + CO₂(g). (b) Nitrates. All nitrates decompose upon heating. Sodium and potassium nitrates melt to colourless liquids. They slowly decompose, forming oxygen and a nitrite, which is pale yellow. Sodium nitrate(s) + Heat → Oxygen(g) + sodium nitrite(s). All nitrates from calcium down to copper in the reactivity series decompose to give their corresponding oxides, brown fumes of nitrogen dioxide gas and colourless oxygen gas. Lead (II) nitrate crackles on heating because gas forms inside its crystals and splits them. It then melts and forms a reddish-brown gas, which is a mixture of oxygen and nitrogen dioxide. The solid lead (II) oxide which remains is reddish-brown when hot and yellow when cold. Lead nitrate(s) + Heat → Lead oxide(s) + nitrogen dioxide(g) + oxygen(g). Green copper nitrate splits up in the same way, leaving black copper oxide. Copper nitrate(s) + Heat → Copper oxide(s) + Nitrogen dioxide(g) + oxygen(g). Zinc nitrate decomposes to form zinc oxide, which is yellow when hot and white when cold. Zinc nitrate(s) + Heat → Zinc oxide(s) + nitrogen dioxide(g) + oxygen(g). Mercury (II) nitrate and silver nitrate decompose to give their corresponding metals, brown fumes of nitrogen dioxide gas and a colourless gas that relights a glowing splint (oxygen gas). 2AgNO₃(s) + Heat → Ag(s) + 2NO₂(g) + O₂(g). Hg(NO₃)₂(s) + Heat → Hg(l) + 2NO₂(g) + O₂(g). Ammonium nitrate sublimes upon heating to give dinitrogen oxide and water vapor. NH₄NO₃(s) + Heat → N₂O(g) + 2H₂O(g). (c) Sulphates. Most sulphates are stable when heated gently but on strong heating they decompose forming SO₂ and/or SO₃ and an oxide of a metal. When a hydrated sulphate of potassium or sodium is heated, it loses its water of crystallization and becomes amorphous. K₂SO₄.10H₂O(s) + Heat → K₂SO₄(s) + 10H₂O(g). Fe₂(SO₄)₃(s) + Heat → Fe₂O₃(s) + 3SO₃(g). Hydrated iron (II) sulphate and copper (II) sulphate lose water of crystallization on gentle heating and then decompose on strong heating. The water condenses as a colourless liquid on the cooler parts of the test tube. FeSO₄.7H₂O(s) + Heat → FeSO₄(s) + 7H₂O(l). 2FeSO₄(s) + Heat → Fe₂O₃(s) + SO₂(g) + SO₃(g). CuSO₄.5H₂O(s) + Heat → CuSO₄(s) + 5H₂O(l). CuSO₄(s) + Heat → CuO(s) + SO₃(g). Ammonium sulphate melts and then decomposes to form ammonia and ammonium hydrogen sulphate. (NH₄)₂SO₄(s) + Heat → NH₃(g) + NH₄HSO₄(s). Sulphates of heavy metals decompose to give metal oxides and white fumes of sulphur trioxide gas. When heated more strongly, the sulphur trioxide gas decomposes to give sulphur dioxide and oxygen gas. (d) Chlorides. Ammonium chloride sublimes on slight heating and on further heating, it decomposes to give ammonia and hydrogen chloride gases. The gases can recombine on cooling. NH₄Cl(s) + Heat → NH₃(g) + HCl(g). Anhydrous metallic chlorides are not affected by heat because they are very stable except anhydrous Iron (III) chloride that sublimes on heating. However, if the chlorides are hydrated, they lose their water of crystallization except hydrated Iron (III) chloride that decomposes. MgCl₂.7H₂O(s) + Heat → MgCl₂(s) + 7H₂O(g). 2FeCl₃.6H₂O(s) + Heat → Fe₂O₃(s) + 3H₂O(g/l) + 6HCl(g). (e) Hydroxides. Hydroxides of sodium and potassium are not decomposed by heat. If they are in solid forms, they absorb moisture and melt to form colourless liquids. However, the hydroxides of other metals decompose to give the corresponding oxides and water. At this very moment, I need you to organise yourself, breathe in and out, then write down the summary table provided below. I personally think that understanding the table below to the finest detail is a step closer to fulfilling your dreams. Table2.Effect_of_heat_on_salts_and_their_solubilities_in_water.odt. Video3.Long_video_summary_on_acids_bases_and_salts.mp4. Ionic Chemistry and qualitative analysis. Qualitative Analysis is about finding the name of an unknown salt by carrying out several specific experiments/tests. All salts contain 2 parts (Cation and Anion). The question usually shows the observations of tests, and you will have to find out what is the salt according to the observation. This systematic examination of a chemical compound to find out the elements or ions present in it, type of bond or nature of reactivity, is also referred to as property analysis. In a practical experiment, a student is normally given one or more substances and he/she is expected to carry out a number of tests on the substance(s). He/she is further expected to record the observations and make relevant deductions about the nature of substance(s) given. Preliminary test. The purpose of this test is to give general guidelines on the nature of substance being analyzed. Preliminary analysis is based on three major aspects. Appearance, flame colour and action of heat. Appearance. The appearance of substances can further be divided in to three categories i.e., physical state, colour and smell. i) Physical state. Carbonates and oxides appear powdery whereas nitrates, sulphates, and chlorides appear crystalline. ii) Smell. Some compounds especially ammonium compounds and sulphides possess a noticeable smell. iii) Colour. Colour serves as a good guide as to what metallic ions may be present in a given substance. However, it is important to note that a substance cannot be completely identified basing on its colour. A recap on detection and identification of gases (Refer to table3.Summary_of_gases for the tests for more details). Gases are normally given off when substances are heated or when reagents like acids are added to substances. How do you know that a gas is being evolved. i) Effervescence (rapid emission of bubbles) occurs. ii) Colour. A few gases possess noticeable colours e.g., brown fumes for nitrogen dioxide. iii) Smell. Some gases have got distinctive smells and they are usually unpleasant. E.g., ammonia (chocking smell) and hydrogen dioxide (smell of rotten eggs). After identifying that a gas is given off, it can then be identified using a chemical test. Common tests to identify gases. i) Support of combustion. a) Oxygen relights a glowing splint. b) For a burning splint, if the flame is blue in colour, then suspect hydrogen or carbon monoxide. ii) Litmus paper. Damp/wet litmus paper is always used. Alkaline gases such as ammonia turn red litmus paper blue while acidic gases like carbon dioxide turn blue litmus pink/red. iii) Lime water/calcium hydroxide; This serves as a confirmatory test for carbon dioxide gas, indicating the presence of a carbonate or hydrogen carbonate. Carbon dioxide turns lime water milky. iv) Water vapour. This is seen as a colourless condensed liquid on the wall of the test tube when heating. Summary of analysis based on appearance. Crystalline substance (Probably a nitrate, sulphate, chloride or a hydrate (hydrated compound) present). Deliquescent substance (Probably a chloride, nitrate present). White solid or colourless solution (Probably potassium, sodium, calcium, magnesium, aluminium, zinc, lead, ammonium ions present). Green substance (Possibly iron (II), copper (II) ions present). Blue substance (Probably copper (II) ions present). Brown/yellow substance (Probably iron (III), lead (II) oxide (if the substance is a solid) present). Colourless gas with a pungent smell (chocking smell) and turns moist red litmus paper blue (Possibly ammonium salt present, ammonia gas is given off). Colourless gas with a pungent smell (chocking smell) and turns moist blue litmus paper red (Possibly sulphite present). Smell of rotten eggs (Probably a sulphide present). Action of heat. Usually, a little of the substance is heated in a dry, hard glass test tube gently at first and then strongly until there is no further change. Since the action of heat on solids leads to decomposition of the substance, there is need to always observe the gases given off (if any) and the residue left in the test tube after heating. Observations made when some solids are heated are given below. Residue is yellow when hot and white when cold (Residue is zinc oxide, Zinc salt probably present). Residue is brown/red when hot and turns yellow on cooling (Residue is lead (II) oxide, Lead (II) salt probably present). Residue is a black solid (Residue is copper (II) oxide or iron (II) oxide or tri-iron tetra-oxide, copper (II), iron (II), Iron (III) salts probably present). White sublimate (Probably ammonium salt present). Colourless vapour condenses into a colourless liquid on cooler part of the test tube and turns white anhydrous copper (II) sulphate to blue (Substance is hydrated i.e., contains water of crystallization). Cracking sound heard (decrepitation occurs) (Possibly lead (II) nitrate or copper (II) nitrate present). Brown fumes which turn damp blue litmus paper red (Nitrogen dioxide gas given, nitrate possibly present). Colourless gas that turns lime water milky and damp blue litmus paper pink is given off (Carbon dioxide gas given off, a carbonate or a hydrogen carbonate probably present). A colourless gas that relights a glowing splint is given off (Oxygen is given off, probably a nitrate or an oxide is present). Colourless gas with a pungent smell (chocking smell) and turns moist red litmus paper blue (Possibly ammonium salt present, ammonia gas is given off). Flame test. This is done by examining the colour of flame of the substance burning. Bright yellow (Sodium ion possibly present). Lilac (purple) (Potassium ion possibly present). Red (Calcium ion possibly present). Blue-green (Copper (II) ion possibly present). Blue (Lead (II) ion possibly present). Solubility of salts. Since qualitative analysis is mainly carried out in aqueous solutions, there is need to know which salts are soluble in water and those that are in soluble (Refer to table2.Effect_of_heat_on_salts_and_their_solubilities_in_water). Making a test solution. Procedure. Dissolve a little of the substance provided e.g., a spatula endful in about 5cm³ of water. Shake the test tube well until the substance dissolves. The solution obtained is now your test solution. If the solid is insoluble in water, you will be required to dissolve it in cold dilute nitric acid or dilute hydrochloric acid. Detection of cations. The following cations for this level will be considered. NH₄⁺, Al³⁺, Cu²⁺, Zn²⁺, Mg²⁺, Pb²⁺, Fe²⁺, Fe³⁺ and Ca²⁺. These cations can be identified using. i) Sodium hydroxide solution, NaOH(aq). ii) Ammonia solution/aqueous ammonia, NH₄OH or NH₃(aq). The two reagents chosen are not simply by design, sodium hydroxide is a representative of strong alkalis, whereas ammonia solution is a weak alkali. The main reaction between these two reagents and the cations is the precipitation of insoluble metal hydroxides. Some of these metal hydroxides dissolve in excess of these reagents forming solutions of complex ions and some do not dissolve. Understanding the theory behind such conclusions is important for the mastery of qualitative analysis and in this very part of this chapter, much effort has been put in explaining the reasons (though not detailed) behind the choice of different reagents. This is intended to enable one to always pick the right reagents for their experiments. To start, let’s see how cations can be identified using sodium hydroxide, a strong alkali. Procedure. To a small portion of the test solution, add a few drops of sodium hydroxide and shake the mixture. Check if precipitates are formed and note the colour. Add more sodium hydroxide solution until in excess and then shake the solution. Note whether the precipitates formed are soluble in excess alkali or insoluble in excess alkali. The procedure could be simply stated as: To a small portion of the test solution, add sodium hydroxide drop wise until in excess. NB. Incase no precipitate appears after adding sodium hydroxide solution, warm the mixture gently and test for ammonia. Identification of cations using aqueous ammonia, a weak alkali. The procedure remains the same as that of sodium hydroxide. To the test solution, add aqueous ammonia drop wise until in excess. Here, there is no heating even when precipitates are not formed. Confirmatory tests for cations. A confirmatory test is a specific sensitive reaction undergone by a particular ion. Since a combination of respective tests with sodium hydroxide solution and ammonia solution cannot completely identify some cations, confirmatory tests become a necessity. Take note that the confirmatory tests for cations or even anions could be quite many, but we shall cover the commonest tests in this chapter. A different approach is going to be used and we shall simply follow some trails to confirm certain cations {We shall examine different trails to confirm cations of interest}. Care has to be taken since the very first steps that could have a wide range of cations shall not be put in the trails. For these first steps, please refer to the preliminary tests above and unless otherwise, always do such tests at the very end of all other steps to avoid missing out on some observations and as to have them as a benchmark for your analysis. In such tests, if a gas is produced, the gas and its confirmatory test have to be reported in the deductions, along with any other colour changes that are clearly highlighted (Refer to the tests above). Sometimes, your first step maybe to dissolve say the substance in water or any other solvent. In such a case, you would have both the filtrate and the residue. Please endeavour to master the skill of filtering, dividing the filtrate into parts, keeping the residue, washing it, if need be, say in cases where an acid is used as the solvent, then accurately dissolving it in say another selected solvent and finally dividing the obtained solution into enough parts (commonly 3 parts). Depending on the solvent used, one should be able to rightly predict which cations can be only present in the filtrate, which can be only present in the residue and which can be found in either the residue or filtrate. If available, always use this test as a bench mark for the final cations and anions confirmed since there is no way your confirmed cation and anion in the filtrate for example would combine to give an insoluble salt, yet you used water as your solvent. Plus, these trails are not to cram, they are just to act as a guide since more trails can be developed. The whole point is that for every trail chosen, you must have the background knowledge for whatever you are doing. Remember that if you are not given a procedure to follow, for every reagent you choose, you have to confirm its availability first. For every right test, a right observation and its right deduction will always be awarded a certain mark until the maximum marks on that specific test are obtained. ***If it is present and it is not in the filtrate, then it is in the residue***. I conclude by saying that, for every observation made, please accurately give its deduction, know when to suspect a cation and when to suspect an anion, since it is possible for one to predict accurately as many cations and anions as possible in a single experiment. The NH₄⁺ Trail. It comes with a lot of joy to discover that by using just sodium hydroxide solution, one can actually confirm the presence of the ammonium ions with in the test solution. The ammonium ions could be confirmed from the filtrate or the residue. To a small portion of the test solution, add sodium hydroxide drop wise until in excess and then gently warm the mixture if there is no observable change (if no precipitates formed). A colourless gas with a pungent chocking smell which turns damp red litmus paper blue on warming is given off. NH₄⁺(aq) + OH⁻(aq) → H₂O(l) + NH₃(g). However, it is unlikely that no precipitates will form with sodium hydroxide in the first step, in such a case, a solvent, commonly water, is used to dissolve the substance and different tests are then done on the filtrate and the residue. You most probably will have to confirm the ammonium ion from the filtrate since all the common ammonium salts are soluble in water. The Ca²⁺ Trail. Please recall that the hydroxide of calcium is basic in nature. We said that basic hydroxides would only react with acids but not bases. When calcium ions are reacted with sodium hydroxide, a white precipitate insoluble in excess of the strong alkali is formed. Ca₂⁺(aq) + 2OH⁻(aq) → Ca(OH)₂(s). However, on reaction with ammonia, there is no observable change, no precipitate is formed, the solution remains colourless. Since it is only the calcium ions with such a behaviour, the two tests work as a confirmatory test for calcium ions in the laboratory. However, it is unlikely that no precipitates will form with aqueous ammonia, in such a case, a similar dissolution step like that in the NH₄⁺ trail would be opted for and probably Ca²⁺ would be confirmed present with in the filtrate or the magnesium trail covered below could be followed to confirm the presence of calcium ions with in the residue. The Mg²⁺ Trail. Just like calcium hydroxide, magnesium hydroxide, too is a basic hydroxide. When magnesium ions are reacted with sodium hydroxide, a white precipitate insoluble in excess of the strong alkali is formed, a similar observation with calcium ions. Meaning, for such an observation, Ca²⁺ or Mg²⁺ would be suspected present in the solution. Mg₂⁺(aq) + 2OH⁻(aq) → Mg(OH)₂(s). But what distinguishes the magnesium ions from the calcium ions, is that unlike calcium ions, they will react with aqueous ammonia to form a white precipitate insoluble in excess of the weak alkali. Mg₂⁺(aq) + 2OH⁻(aq) → Mg(OH)₂(s). But would this confirm the magnesium ions as present? Most probably no. The reason is that the observation when these magnesium ions react with aqueous ammonia is shared with Pb²⁺ and Al³⁺ cations. Since, Al³⁺ and Pb²⁺ unlike magnesium ions, are soluble in excess sodium hydroxide, it would make sense to filter and keep the white residue from the reaction of the test solution with sodium hydroxide, if at all it is present. If the magnesium ions are present, then we shall confirm that with additional tests on the residue. So, what do we do to the white residue? We dissolve the obtained residue in a reasonable amount of acid to dissolve the suspected calcium or magnesium hydroxides in the residue. To a small portion of the resultant solution, we add aqueous ammonia solution dropwise until in excess. No observable change would confirm calcium ions whereas formation of a white precipitate insoluble in excess ammonia would confirm presence of magnesium ions. The Al³⁺, Zn²⁺ and Pb²⁺ Trails. Please recall that the hydroxides of Aluminium, zinc and lead are amphoteric in nature. Back then, we said they do react with both acids and bases. When Aluminium, zinc and lead ions are reacted with sodium hydroxide, they form their respective hydroxides which are all white in colour and insoluble when not in excess of the strong alkali. However, in excess alkali, these hydroxides will react (dissolve) to form colourless solutions. Sodium hydroxide being a strong alkali, it will ionize completely to provide enough hydroxide ions required to form complexes that are colourless solutions. Zn(OH)₂(s) + 2NaOH(aq) → Na₂Zn(OH)₄(aq) [Sodium zincate, Colourless solution]. Zn(OH)₂(s) + 2OH⁻(aq) → Zn(OH)₄²⁻(aq). Pb(OH)₂(s) + 2NaOH(aq) → Na₂Pb(OH)₄(aq) [Sodium Plumbate, Colourless solution]. Pb(OH)₂(s) + 2OH⁻(aq) → Pb(OH)₄²⁻(aq). Al(OH)₃(s) + NaOH(aq) → NaAl(OH)₄(aq) [Sodium aluminate, Colourless solution]. Al(OH)₃(s) + OH⁻(aq) → Al(OH)₄⁻(aq). Thinking about the reactions above, we are not confirming any of the cations with Sodium hydroxide alone. What do we do then? Quite many options available! (i) We could actually first confirm the presence or absence of zinc ions by using the weak alkali, aqueous ammonia. The trick here is that just like in sodium hydroxide, aluminium, zinc and lead ions when reacted with aqueous ammonia will form their respective hydroxides which are all white in colour. The only difference is that two of these hydroxides will not be soluble in excess of the alkali. But why would it be like that. It is simple, aqueous ammonia, being a weak alkali will not ionize completely in solution, meaning, it won’t provide enough hydroxide ions required to form the soluble complexes as was in excess sodium hydroxide. Basing on that logic, when we look at the reactions of these cations with aqueous ammonia, we would rush to conclude that even zinc ions wouldn’t react with aqueous ammonia. So where is the trick? Why are we saying using aqueous ammonia will actually help us confirm zinc. The logic is that zinc ions, unlike aluminium and lead (II) ions, will actually react with aqueous ammonia. How will zinc ions react, yet aqueous ammonia can’t provide enough hydroxide ions for the reaction? Don’t worry, these zinc ions have a special property that will be detailed in your advanced studies. Zinc hydroxide does react with the excess ammonia solution to form a complex (colourless solution) with the ammonium cation from the aqueous ammonia. Zn(OH)₂(s) + 4NH₃(aq) → Zn(NH₃)4²⁺(aq) [Tetra amine zinc(II) ion, Colourless] + 2OH⁻(aq). Please note that, if zinc ions are confirmed absent at this step, it could mean that your deduction would be lead (II) ions or Aluminium ions probably present, assuming the two had been predicted along with the zinc ions in the step preceding this test. (ii) We could maybe first try other available options. What else could we do? For the case of lead (II), we begin asking ourselves, which salts of Lead (II) ions are insoluble. We look for lead (II) salts that are insoluble because we know they are just a few of them and those few do have distinct properties. Next, we ask ourselves, what would we add to the test solution to get such insoluble lead (II) salts. There are basically 3 common insoluble lead (II) salts [PbI₂, PbSO₄ and PbCl₂]. To get these, one just has to carefully choose a soluble reagent to contribute the respective anion/radical to the lead (II) ions suspected to be in solution. i) To a small portion of the test solution in a test tube, add 3 drops of potassium iodide solution. A bright yellow precipitate is formed. Pb₂⁺(aq) + 2I⁻(aq) → PbI₂(s) [Bright yellow precipitate]. Potassium iodide solution is being used because it is soluble meaning it will contribute the iodide radical, we are interested in to give us PbI₂, one of the insoluble lead salts, that is yellow in colour. This will confirm lead (II) ions since the potential iodides of aluminum and zinc are not yellow precipitates but instead solutions. ii) To a small portion of the test solution in a test tube, add 3 drops of dilute sulphuric acid. A white precipitate is formed. Pb₂⁺(aq) + SO₄²⁻(aq) → PbSO₄(s) [White precipitate]. Dilute sulphuric acid is being used because it is strong acid that ionizes completely in solution, contributing the sulphate radical, we are interested in to give us PbSO₄, one of the insoluble lead salts, that is white in colour. This will confirm lead (II) ions since the potential sulphates of aluminum and zinc are not white precipitates but instead solutions. iii) To a small portion of the test solution in a test tube, add 3 drops of dilute hydrochloric acid. White precipitates are formed that dissolve upon boiling and recrystallise on cooling. Pb₂⁺(aq) + 2Cl⁻(aq) → PbCI₂(s) [White precipitate]. Dilute hydrochloric acid is being used because it is strong acid that ionizes completely in solution, contributing the chloride radical, we are interested in to give us PbCl₂, one of the insoluble lead salts, that is white in colour, dissolves upon boiling and recrystallises on cooling. This will confirm lead (II) ions since the potential chlorides of aluminum and zinc are not white precipitates but instead solutions. (iii) There is just no quite specific test you will do to confirm the aluminium ions. But when you think about it more clearly, we could actually use the confirmatory tests for zinc and lead (II) ions to confirm their absence and in so doing confirm the presence of aluminium ions. Depending on the structure of the Al³⁺, Zn²⁺ and Pb²⁺ trail, you should clearly predict when to suspect all the three cations, when to predict only lead (II) ions and aluminium ions as the cations probably present and when to successfully confirm a single cation as present. The Fe²⁺ Trail. When it comes to accurately confirming the presence of iron (II) ions, there is no need for other reagents either. Our two selected alkalis are good enough to enable us confirm the presence of these ions. Please recall that iron (II) hydroxide is a basic hydroxide. We said basic hydroxides would only react with acids but not bases, meaning, we do expect an insoluble green precipitate to form that is insoluble in excess of either sodium hydroxide solution or aqueous ammonia. Depending on the tests above, Fe²⁺, could have been predicted along with Cu²⁺ or Fe³⁺ or sometimes with the both. In such a case, an insoluble green precipitate insoluble in excess of either sodium hydroxide solution or aqueous ammonia confirms the presence of Fe²⁺. Please note that care must be taken to not confuse Fe²⁺ for Fe³⁺ since it turns to brown on standing due to air oxidation/aerial oxidation of the iron (II) to iron (III). Fe³⁺ Trail. When it comes to accurately confirming the presence of iron (III) ions, there is still no need for other reagents either. Our two selected alkalis are good enough to enable us confirm the presence of these ions. Please recall that iron (III) hydroxide, too is a basic hydroxide. We said basic hydroxides would only react with acids but not bases, meaning, we do expect an insoluble brown/yellow precipitate to form that is insoluble in excess of either sodium hydroxide solution or aqueous ammonia. Depending on the tests above, Fe³⁺, could have been predicted along with Fe²⁺ or Cu²⁺ or the both or sometimes along with Pb²⁺. In such a case, an insoluble brown/yellow precipitate insoluble in excess of either sodium hydroxide solution or aqueous ammonia confirms the presence of Fe³⁺. Again, note that care must be taken to not confuse Fe²⁺ for Fe³⁺ since it turns to brown on standing due to air oxidation/aerial oxidation of the iron (II) to iron (III). The Cu²⁺ Trail. When it comes to accurately confirming the presence of copper (II) ions, there is no need for other reagents either. Our two selected alkalis are good enough to enable us confirm the presence of these ions. Please recall that copper (II) hydroxide, too is a basic hydroxide. We said basic hydroxides would only react with acids but not bases. When copper (II) ions are reacted with sodium hydroxide, copper (II) hydroxide, which is pale blue in colour and insoluble in excess of the strong alkali is formed. Cu²⁺(aq) + 2OH⁻(aq) → Cu(OH)₂(s). However, in the case of excess ammonia solution, just like the zinc ions, the trick is that copper (II) ions too have a special property that will be detailed in your advanced studies. Copper (II) hydroxide does react with the excess ammonia solution to form a complex (deep blue solution) with the ammonium cation from the aqueous ammonia. The pale blue precipitates of copper (II) hydroxide that do not dissolve in excess sodium hydroxide do dissolve in excess ammonia solution forming a deep blue solution. Cu(OH)₂(s) + 4NH₃(aq) → Cu(NH₃)4²⁺(aq) [Tetraamine copper(II) ion, Deep blue] + 2OH⁻(aq). This procedure serves as a confirmatory test for copper (II) ions. Detection of anions. When it comes to anions, the trails can be quite many and thus we are just going to focus on confirmatory tests of the anions considered for this level. My request is that you go back and explore in detail, these two tables [table2.Effect_of_heat_on_salts_and_their_solubilities_in_water and table3.Summary_of_gases]. Major anions that are considered are. sulphate (SO₄²⁻), carbonate (CO₃²⁻), chloride (Cl⁻) and nitrate (NO₃⁻). These ions can be divided into three major groups as: Those that react with (major) dilute acids to give off gases. Those that react with concentrated sulphuric acid to liberate gases. Those that react with neither dilute acids nor concentrated sulphuric acid. a) Anions that react with (major) dilute acids to give off gases. Test procedure. To the test solution, add 2-3 drops of dilute nitric acid or dilute hydrochloric acid. If no reaction occurs, warm the mixture gently, if effervescence occurs, smell the gas with care and identify it (Refer to table3.Summary_of_gases for the tests and the preliminary tests covered above). Possible reaction to give off carbon dioxide [CO₃²⁻(aq) + 2H⁺(aq) → CO₂(g) + H₂O(l)] or [HCO₃⁻(aq) + H⁺(aq) → CO₂(g) + H₂O(l)]. Possible reaction to give off sulphur dioxide [SO₃²⁻(aq) + 2H⁺(aq) → SO₂(g) + H₂O(l)]. Possible reaction to give off hydrogen sulphide [S₂⁻(aq) + 2H⁺(aq) → H₂S(g)]. Anions that react with concentrated sulphuric acid. The reaction is the same as above but in this case, they are more vigorous. Test procedure. Add 1-2cm³ of concentrated sulphuric to the solid under test in a test tube. If no reaction occurs, warm the mixture but do not boil. Identify the anion present as per the above examples (Refer to table3.Summary_of_gases for the tests and the preliminary tests covered above). Anions that do not react with acids. Under this, consideration will only be made for a sulphate anion. The sulphate ions don’t react with dilute or concentrated acids. Please note that more than one anion can be predicted from a single experiment. The logic is in being able to correctly identify the right gases and to accurately interpret the meaning of the colour changes of substances. In this particular chapter, we shall focus on the confirmatory tests for these common anions. Confirmatory tests for anions. If necessary, first dissolve a little of the substance in cold distilled water. a) Sulphate. Procedure. To the solution under test, add an equal volume of dilute nitric acid followed by 2-3 drops of. i) Barium nitrate solution. A dense white precipitate is formed (if a sulphate is present). BaCl₂(aq) + Na₂SO₄(aq) → BaSO₄(s) + 2NaCl(aq). Ba²⁺(aq) + SO₄²⁻(aq) → BaSO₄(s). NB. Barium chloride solution can be used in place of barium nitrate. In such a case, the acid used would be dilute hydrochloric acid. ii) Lead (II) nitrate solution and boil the mixture. White precipitate is formed which does not dissolve on boiling. Pb₂⁺(aq) + SO₄²⁻(aq) → PbSO₄(s). NB. The selected reagents are chosen because we know they will provide the necessary cations that combine with the sulphate ions if present to give us insoluble sulphates. Questions. (a) Lead (II) chloride solution or silver chloride solution can’t be used in place of lead (II) nitrate solution yet barium chloride solution and not silver chloride solution can be used in place of barium nitrate. Could you predict why? Simple, lead (II) chloride solution and silver chloride solutions are not quite soluble salts, meaning they wouldn’t provide enough Pb²⁺ to form PbSO₄. (b) An equal volume of an acid is being added before these reagents. Why would you not just add say barium nitrate solution? The acid is being added to remove impurities especially carbonates, the common suspects and sulphites, which too often would appear as white precipitates on reaction with the reagents. By adding an acid, it reacts with any carbonate or hydrogen carbonate or sulphite, removing it from the test solution so that it does not interfere with the results. The sulphates on the other hand do stay in the test solution because they don’t react with dilute nitric acid or dilute hydrochloric acid. (c) When you think deep, you discover that the acids being used are strong acids and they too have to be accurately selected. How would explain the choice of which acid to add before a reagent is added? First of all, an acid like sulphuric acid in such a case can’t be used. This is simply because it could introduce the sulphate ions into solution, interfering with our observations and deductions. This would leave us with two other common strong acids (HNO₃ and HCl). Since all nitrates are soluble, if one is interested in confirming a cation using its precipitate, then nitric acid is always an option. And since of all common chlorides, it is only lead (II) chloride, mercury (I) chloride and silver chloride that are insoluble, hydrochloric acid can also be an option as long as there isn’t a possibility of formation of any of these insoluble chlorides, which in this case aren’t of our interest. But we are saying the radical of both the acid used and the reagent should be the same. Why? Simple, we don’t want to introduce a different anion with in the test solution that would lead to unnecessary chemical reactions. This same logic applies to the other confirmatory tests for some of the other anions. b) Chloride. Solid chloride. When concentrated sulphuric acid is added to any chloride, hydrogen chloride gas is evolved. The gas forms fumes in moist air. turns moist blue litmus paper red. and forms thick white fumes of ammonium chloride with ammonia. and forms white precipitates of silver chloride with acidified silver nitrate solution. Chloride in solution. The only three common insoluble chlorides are lead (II) chloride, mercury (I) chloride and silver chloride. a) Silver nitrate test. To a small portion of the test solution, add an equal volume of dilute nitric acid followed by 2-3 drops of silver nitrate solution. A white precipitate appears which turns violet on exposure to light and the precipitate is readily soluble in aqueous ammonia. Ag(aq) + Cl⁻(aq) → AgCl(s) (White precipitate). When a little ammonia solution is added to the above solution, the white precipitates dissolve. b) Lead (II) nitrate test. To a small portion of the test solution, add an equal volume of dilute nitric acid followed by 2-3 drops of lead (II) nitrate solution and boil the mixture. A white precipitate formed which dissolves on boiling and recrystallises on cooling. This confirms a chloride. Pb₂⁺(aq) + 2Cl⁻(aq) → PbCl₂(s) [White precipitates which dissolve on boiling]. NB: Could you predict its role and why HCl can’t be used? In this case, like in the test for sulphates, the acid is being added to remove impurities especially carbonates, the common suspects and sulphites, which too often would appear as white precipitates on reaction with the reagents. Of course, we can’t use hydrochloric acid as it would introduce chloride ions in solution. We can't use silver sulphate either since it is often obtained from most of its sources as a slightly soluble salt. Carbonate and hydrogen carbonates. We learnt in our previous chapters that all carbonates and hydrogen carbonates give off carbon dioxide when they are treated with dilute acids. This serves as a temporary test for carbonates and hydrogen carbonates. Apart from potassium, sodium and ammonium carbonates, all other carbonates decompose upon heating to give off carbon dioxide. a) If the sample is a solid. Add a little dilute acid to the solid substance under test. Effervescence occurs and a colourless gas that turns lime water milky (carbon dioxide) is given off. This shows that a carbonate or hydrogen carbonate is present. Note that any dilute acid would work since enough carbondioxide would be given off to turn lime water milky. b) Carbonate or Hydrogen carbonate in solution form. To 2cm³ of the test solution add 2-3 drops of lead (II) nitrate solution followed by excess dilute nitric acid. White precipitate that dissolves in excess nitric acid with effervescence is formed. NB. Sometimes, barium nitrate solution or barium chloride solution or silver nitrate solution may be used in place of lead (II) nitrate solution. Pb₂⁺(aq) + CO₃²⁻(aq) → PbCO₃(s). Pb₂⁺(aq) + 2HCO₃⁻(aq) → PbCO₃(s) + H₂O(l) + CO₂(g). Ba²⁺(aq) + CO₃²⁻(aq) → BaCO₃(s). Ba²⁺(aq) + 2HCO₃⁻(aq) → BaCO₃(s) + H₂O(l) + CO₂(g). 2Ag⁺(aq) + CO₃²⁻(aq) → Ag₂CO₃(s). 2Ag⁺(aq) + 2HCO₃⁻(aq) → Ag₂CO₃(s) + H₂O(l) + CO₂(g). The precipitate formed dissolves in excess nitric acid with effervescence, according to the following equation: PbCO₃(s) + HNO₃(aq) → Pb(NO₃)₂(aq) + H₂O(l) + CO₂(g). The choice for these reagents should be clear. Note that we can’t use salts of ammonium, potassium and sodium ions as reagents as their carbonates are soluble. One could use other reagents too, but the highlighted ones are the commonest reagents. When you think about the suggested tests, you discover that sometimes, there is a need to differentiate between a carbonate and a hydrogen carbonate. So, what do we do? Simple, there is a specific reagent for this. Magnesium sulphate solution or Magnesium chloride solution. Add magnesium sulphate solution or magnesium chloride solution to a test solution to distinguish between a carbonate and a hydrogen carbonate. Observation: With a carbonate, a white precipitate of magnesium carbonate is formed. Mg²⁺(aq) + CO₃²⁻(aq) → MgCO₃(s). With a hydrogen carbonate, no precipitate forms or the solution remains colourless (no observable change). Mg²⁺(aq) + 2HCO₃⁻(aq) → Mg(HCO₃)₂(aq). On heating, the magnesium hydrogen carbonate decomposes to the insoluble magnesium carbonate (white precipitate). Mg(HCO₃)₂(aq) → MgCO₃(s) + 2H₂O(l) + CO₂(g). If for whatever reason, there isn’t a possibility to differentiate between a carbonate and hydrogen carbonate using magnesium sulphate solution, then at this level, since it’s the carbonates that are mainly examined, it will always be a carbonate to be confirmed present. Nitrate. Recall that apart from potassium, sodium and ammonium nitrates, all other nitrates liberate brown fumes of nitrogen dioxide gas when heated strongly. The liberation of brown fumes serves as a temporary confirmatory test for a nitrate. To confirm presence of a nitrate, we carry out the brown ring test using a specific reagent, freshly prepared iron (II) sulphate solution. To the solution of a substance under test, add an equal volume of freshly prepared iron (II) sulphate solution. Then carefully add a few drops of concentrated sulphuric acid down the sides of a slanting test tube. Since concentrated sulphuric acid is denser than the mixture, it displaces the mixture, sinks and occupies the bottom part of the test tube, forming a separate layer. A brown ring slowly forms where the acid meets the top layer. This confirms the presence of a nitrate (The details for the brown ring test will be covered in your advanced studies). Figure6.confirmatory_test_of_nitrate.jpg. YES! Finally, we end this long chapter too. Next are questions (remember to keep updated for as many questions as possible). Together, nothing is impossible (Don’t miss the next topic);
