The word “salt” has a wider meaning in chemistry. John was heard saying that salts are indeed a large family of compounds, which have the same colour, taste and solubility. Could he be right?;
A salt is a compound formed when all the replaceable or part of the replaceable hydrogen ions of an acid has been replaced by a metal or ammonium ion. Is the name of the salt derived from the acid from which it is formed?;
Which one of the following methods is used to prepare an insoluble salt? (a) Filtration (b) Titration (c) Double decomposition (d) Neutralisation; 
All salts formed from sulphuric acid are called sulphates. All salts derived from hydrochloric acid are called chlorides. All salts derived from nitric acid are called nitrates. Are all salts derived from sulphurous acid also called sulphates?; All monobasic acids form normal salts while dibasic and tribasic acids form both normal and acid salts. Is it true to say that a normal salt is a salt formed when all the ionizable hydrogen ions of an acid are replaced by a metallic ion or ammonium ion?;
Hellen says that an acid salt is a salt formed when ionizable hydrogen ions of an acid are partially replaced by a metallic ion or ammonium ion. And that all common laboratory acids could provide us with an acid salt. Could this be true?; 
Acid salts are formed when dibasic or tribasic acids are reacted with metal ions or ammonium ions. Is it true to say that these acid salts behave like salts because they contain a metallic ion and a negative ion, and, that they behave like acids because the negative ions are capable of further ionization to yield hydrogen ions?; 
A basic salt is a compound of the normal salt and a base from which its derived. Basic salts are formed when insufficient acid is present to neutralize the available base. Which of the following is a basic salt? (a) Basic zinc phosphate (b) Basic magnesium phosphate (c) Basic zinc chloride (d) Basic zinc sulphate;
A double salt is a combination of two normal salts. Double salts consist of two different positive ions and one common negative ion and most of them contain water of crystallization loosely attached to the cations in the salt. Which of the following is not a double salt? (a) Potassium aluminium sulphate (b) Potassium magnesium chloride (c) Ferrous ammonium sulphate (d) Ferric ammonium sulphate;
Anhydrous salts are salts which do not contain water of crystallization. Hydrated salts are salts which contain water of crystallization. CuSO₄.5H₂O FeSO₄.7H₂O, MgSO₄.7H₂O, Na₂SO₄.10H₂O and Na₂CO₃.10H₂O are all examples of hydrated salts. When most of these salts are gently heated, they lose their water of crystallization. In such a process, do they obtain their crystalline nature and become powdery?; 
Normal salts are neutral except a few. Is it true that normal salts such as potassium carbonate and sodium carbonate show some basic characteristics?;
Some normal salts dissolve in water resulting in an acidic solution. Which of the following salts possess such a property? (a) NaCl (b) NH₄OH (c) NH₄Cl (d) AlCl₃; 
To 5cm³ of water in a test-tube, Joan added half a spatula endful of salt crystals and shook to dissolve. She then added 2-3 drops of the universal indicator and shook again. She recorded the pH of the solution using a pH chart. Did she correctly determine the pH of the salt crystals?;
Salts play an important role in our lives. They have health, economic, agricultural and traditional values. Many medicines forexample, are salts. A plaster of Paris is made of calcium sulphate. Tooth paste contains tin II fluoride. Dry cells contain ammonium chloride. Silver bromide is used in photographic films. Ammonia sulphate is a fertilizer for alkaline soils. Anhydrous calcium chloride is a drying agent. etc. Are meat, plants and dairy products the key sources for mineral salts?;
The essential sources of mineral salts are the mines and sea water. Halimah says that the rock salt and sea water are the sources of sodium chloride. That in addition, the Chile saltpetre is a source of sodium nitrate. Is she right to add that gypsum is a source of calcium sulphate?;
It is quite remarkable. Salts really have quite many uses. The fireworks we love, are primarily a combination of different compounds. Which of the following salts is one of the most components of gun powder that propels the fireworks into the sky? (a) Calcium chloride (b) Sodium nitrate (c) Potassium nitrate (d) Barium chloride;
A fuse is used to light gunpowder, which ignites to send the fireworks towards the sky. Amanda says that the colour of the fireworks depends on the metals present in the salt. That calcium chloride is for the orange colour of fireworks, sodium nitrate for yellow, barium chloride for green, copper II chloride for blue and strontium carbonate for red. Could she be all right?;
The solubility of a salt has to be considered before deciding on the method of its preparation. While salts are ionic compounds, not all salts are soluble in water. When a solute dissolves in water, the result is an aqueous solution. Is solubility similar to the ability to dissolve a substance?; 
Solubility is the amount of solute in grams required to saturate 100g of a solvent at a particular temperature. Water is the common solvent used and thus solubilities of substances are often based on the mass of the salt that will dissolve in a given volume of water. Are solubility rules, the general qualitative rules for determining the solubility of a substance at room temperature and pressure?; 
The units of solubility are g/100g of H₂O at a given temperature. For classification purposes, a solute dissolved in water at 25 degrees Celsius and 1atm is usually considered to be soluble, if more than 1.0g can be dissolved in 100ml of water. Insoluble, if less than 0.1g can be dissolved in 100ml of water. And, sparingly soluble, if between 0.1g and 1.0g can be dissolved in 100ml of water. Is potassium nitrate a sparing soluble salt?;
Basing on the solubility of a solute in water and the amount of solute that has been dissolved in water to make a solution, an aqueous solution can either be unsaturated or saturated or supersaturated. Lionel Messi says that an unsaturated solution is one which can take up more solute at that temperature while a saturated solution is one which cannot dissolve any more solute at that temperature in the presence of undissolved solute. Could a super saturated solution be one which contains more solute than is required to form a saturated solution at a particular temperature?;
Fatuma never dissapoints. She does the right thing at the right time. In an experiment to determine the solubility of sodium chloride, she found out that 75g of a saturated solution of sodium chloride contains 30g of sodium chloride at 200⁰C. What is the solubility of sodium chloride at 200⁰C? (a) 66.7g/100g of H₂O (b) 50g/100g of H₂O (c) 57g/100g of H₂O (d) 40g/100g of water; 
When one focuses, nothing can stop them. In an experiment to determine the solubility of sodium chloride, Mrs. Rose found out that 75g of a saturated solution of sodium chloride contains 30g of sodium chloride at 200⁰C. What is the percentage of the salt in the saturated solution? (a) 66.7% (b) 40% (c) 57% (d) 43%; 
Mandela evaporated 12g of a saturated solution and 4g of solid potassium nitrate was left. What is the solubility of sodium nitrate? (a) 66.7g/100g of H₂O (b) 40g/100g of H₂O (c) 50g/100g of H₂O (d) 57g/100g of water;  
Successful people are always determined. They just never give up. After quite many trials, Besigye found out that 23g of potassium chlorate at 21⁰C saturated 40cm³ of water. What is the solubility of potassium chlorate at 21⁰C? (a) 66.7g/100g of H₂O (b) 40g/100g of H₂O (c) 50g/100g of H₂O (d) 57g/100g of water;  
In an experiment to determine the solubility of a salt, 30g of sodium chloride crystals were dissolved in 75g of water at 80⁰C. What is the solubility of sodium chloride at this temperature? (a) 40g/100g of H₂O (b) 66.7g/100g of H₂O (c) 50g/100g of H₂O (d) 57g/100g of water;
12.0g of potassium chlorate was carefully evaporated to dryness, 2.4g of potassium chlorate crystals were left on the evaporating dish. What is the solubility of potassium chlorate in grams per 100g of water at room temperature? (a) 66.7g/100g of H₂O (b) 25g/100g of H₂O (c) 50g/100g of H₂O (d) 57g/100g of water;
The solubility curve of a substance is a graph showing how its solubility varies with temperature. The graph is obtained by plotting solubility against temperature. The solubility of some salts increase with temperature and their curves rise steeply. Is it true that the solubility of all the other salts change little with rise in temperature and their curves rise gently?;
Solubility curves can be used to obtain solubility of the salt at various temperatures, and to determine the temperature at which a certain mass of salt when dissolved in water, can form a saturated solution. Can they also be used to explain the trend of solubility of salts?; 
Alexander cooled salt P with a solubility of 180g/100g of water at 90˚C to a temperature of 30˚C where its solubility is 25g/100g of water. What is the mass of the salt formed after cooling the solution? (a) 155g (b) 25g (c) 50g(d) 57g;
The solubility of potassium chloride, potassium nitrate and potassium chlorate increase with increase in temperature. The solubility of potassium nitrate increases most rapidly, followed by potassium chlorate then potassium chloride. The solubility of sodium chloride increases very slightly with increase in temperature. Does the solubility of calcium sulphate really decrease with increase in temperature?; 
Variation in solubility of a salt with temperature is the basis of fractional crystallization of salts. Fractional crystallization is used in the extraction of sodium carbonate and sodium chloride. Can this method also be used for extraction of aluminium carbonate?; 
Could the production of fizzy drinks e.g., soda which contain carbon dioxide dissolved at high pressure and low temperatures, be one of the applications of solubility?; 
Factors that affect the rate of solubility of salts include the amount of solvent, nature of solvent/solute and temperature. Are some salts of group I elements insoluble in water?;
Apart from some complex compounds, all sodium, potassium and ammonium salts are soluble in water, and all nitrates are soluble in water. All carbonates are insoluble in water except those that are for group I elements of the periodic table and ammonium carbonate. Is it true that Magnesium carbonate is slightly soluble and Aluminium carbonate doesn’t exist?;
All sulphates are soluble in water except those of barium, strontium and lead. Calcium sulphate, silver sulphate and mercurous sulphate are slightly soluble. Is it true that since calcium sulphate is slightly soluble in water, it is often precipitated in reactions between the calcium and sulphate ions?; 
All chlorides, bromides and iodides are soluble in water, except those of silver, lead and mercurous mercury. Lead chloride and lead bromide are slightly soluble in cold water but more soluble in hot water. All oxides are insoluble in water. All hydroxides are insoluble in water except those of sodium, potassium and ammonium. The hydroxides of calcium, strontium and barium are moderately soluble. Magnesium hydroxide is only very slightly soluble. Is it true that the rest of the hydroxides are insoluble?; 
All solid hydrogen carbonates are soluble in water except sodium hydrogen carbonate which is only slightly soluble. Hydrogen carbonates of elements below magnesium in the reactivity series don’t exist. Magnesium and Calcium hydrogen carbonates exist only in solution. Is it really possible to isolate solid calcium hydrogen carbonate and magnesium hydrogen carbonate from their solutions?;
Sodium hydrogen carbonate is called baking soda since it is used as a raising agent along with tartaric acid, the cream of tartar, in bread making. Can sodium hydrogen carbonate also be called bicarbonate of soda?; 
All sulphides are insoluble in water except those of ammonium, sodium, potassium, calcium, magnesium, barium and strontium. All phosphates and hydrogen phosphates are insoluble in water except those of sodium, potassium and ammonium. Some hydrogen phosphates such as calcium hydrogen phosphate are soluble. Are all chlorates insoluble in water?; 
Naturally existing salts contain a lot of impurities, and it becomes very costly to obtain them in pure form. Impure salts have a lot of side effects once used and thus the need for pure salts. Soluble salts are usually prepared by methods which involve crystallization. Insoluble salts are usually prepared by precipitation or double decomposition. Is it true that some salts, soluble or insoluble, can be prepared directly from their elements?; 
It is true that most soluble salts can be prepared by reacting an acid with an insoluble solid. The insoluble solid can be a metal, a carbonate or a base. This is done by adding an excess of solid reactant bit by bit to an aqueous acid in a beaker. The excess solid reactant ensures that the acid is completely reacted. Once the reaction is complete, excess solid can be filtered off to obtain a filtrate which is then evaporated and allowed to cool to form salt crystals. The crystals formed are then filtered out from the mother liquor, washed with distilled water and dried in an oven or under sun shine or between filter papers to obtain the salt. Does an acid + a metal, give a salt + water?; 
During the preparation of Zinc sulphate crystals from zinc metal, copper II sulphate solution was added. Could it be serving as a catalyst, to speed up the reaction?;
Salts whose carbonates and hydroxides are soluble can be prepared by the titration method. This is done by reacting an acid with a soluble reactant through titration. The reactant can be an alkali or a soluble carbonate. Since both reactants are soluble, exact quantities of each reactant have to be used to avoid contamination of the final product. The quantities are obtained by performing titration once with a suitable indicator. An indicator is necessary to determine when the reaction is complete as the reactants used to perform titration are usually colourless. Titration is then repeated without an indicator. Is it good practice to evaporate the salt solution obtained to dryness?; 
In the preparation of iron II sulphate from iron and dilute sulphuric acid, the acid is put in a beaker and warmed. Is warming done to increase the rate of reaction?; 
In the preparation of iron II sulphate from iron fillings and dilute sulphuric acid, the grease on the fillings is removed before use by stirring with ethanol or methylated spirit for several minutes. Could a polar solvent work in the place of ethanol or methylated spirit?; 
Magnesium sulphate occurs naturally in minerals such as kieserite and epsomite. The mineral can be dissolved in hot water and the purified sulphate is obtained by crystallization. Could the sulphate also be made in the laboratory by reacting magnesium oxide with dilute sulphuric acid?; 
The reaction of baking powder/sodium bicarbonate and vinegar/ethanoic acid is a common procedure to obtain sodium ethanoate in the laboratory. For this reaction, a balloon containing one spatula endful of baking soda is fixed over the mouth of a plastic water bottle or test-tube half filled with vinegar. The baking soda is carefully emptied into the vinegar and the contents shook gently so as to mix. The balloon becomes filled with gas. Could this be the gas that turns damp red litmus paper blue and lime water milky?;
Neutralization is a reaction between an acid and a base to produce a salt and water only. This reaction can be used to prepare sodium chloride by a technique called titration, where an acid is put in a burette and the alkali is put in a conical flask. Can common salt be prepared using the same technique?;
Sodium chloride occurs naturally in lake Katwe in Kasese district of Uganda. The lake also has potential to produce other useful salts like sodium carbonate, sodium sulphate and potassium sulphate which are removed as impurities in the process of refining salty water to produce common salt. Could common salt also be obtained from fresh water lakes?; 
Double decomposition/precipitation is the method used to prepare insoluble salts. During this method, two aqueous solutions are mixed and a solid called a precipitate is formed. The precipitate is filtered off and purified by washing with distilled water to obtain the salt. Is it true that calcium sulphate though slightly soluble in water, is rarely precipitated in reactions between the calcium and sulphate ions?; 
Lead II sulphate can be obtained by reacting lead II nitrate and sodium sulphate. However, in the preparation of lead II sulphate using lead II oxide, Mary first dissolved the oxide in nitric acid. Wouldn't it have been better to dissolve the oxide in hydrochloric acid instead?; 
Which of the following salts can't be obtained by double decomposition? (a) PbSO₄ (b) Silver chloride (c) Zinc hydroxide (d) NaI; 
Some salts, soluble or insoluble, can be prepared directly from their elements. This method is limited to binary salts such as chlorides, bromides, iodides and sulphides. To prepare Iron II Sulphide. Add powered sulphur to iron filings in a ratio of 4:7 by mass. Ground the mixture thoroughly in a mortar and put it into a dry test-tube. Heat the mixture strongly in a small flame until no further change. The mixture glows red/orange. When it does so, remove the flame and hold the test-tube over a mortar as a precaution against breakage. Does the sulphide formed remain black on contacting air at the surface?;
Magdalene heat an iron wire in a combustion tube strongly. She then passed a stream of chlorine over the heated iron wire in the combustion tube. The iron wire glew hot and reacted with chlorine to form an orange to brown-black solid. Could this obtained solid be anhydrous iron III Chloride?; 
I found Richard in the laboratory the other morning preparing a certain salt. This guy passed dry hydrogen chloride over strongly heated iron wire and a white anhydrous solid was formed. Could this obtained solid be anhydrous iron III Chloride?;  
Joanita was really excited on one of the Monday mornings. While in the laboratory, she prepared sodium chloride directly from sodium and chlorine, by lowering burning sodium in a gas jar of chlorine. The sodium continued to burn in chlorine forming white fumes which settled into white solids. Could she also prepare MgCl₂, KCl and ZnBr₂ using a similar procedure?;
Potassium, sodium and lithium carbonates are very stable and are not decomposed by heat. But if hydrated potassium and sodium carbonates are gently heated, they lose their water of crystallization. In such a process, do the salts gain their crystalline nature?; 
Does ammonium carbonate decompose to ammonia, water vapour and carbon dioxide on heating?;
Apart from ammonium, potassium, sodium and lithium carbonates, all the other metallic carbonates decompose upon heating to give the oxide of the metal and carbon dioxide gas. On heating a certain white powder, Hajat obtained a yellow solid when hot and white when cold, and a colourless gas that turned lime water milky. Could the powder be lead II carbonate?; 
Hydrogen carbonates of metals decompose to form carbonates of the respective metals, carbon dioxide gas and water vapor. Ammonium hydrogen carbonate sublimes on heating to form 3 gases. Could the three gases be NH₃, CO₂ and water vapour?;
All nitrates decompose upon heating. Sodium and potassium nitrates melt to colourless liquids. They slowly decompose, forming oxygen and a nitrite, which is pale yellow. All nitrates from calcium down to copper in the reactivity series decompose to give their corresponding oxides, brown fumes of nitrogen dioxide gas and colourless oxygen gas. Lead II nitrate crackles on heating because gas forms inside its crystals and splits them. It then melts and forms a reddish-brown gas, which is a mixture of oxygen and nitrogen dioxide. Is the solid that remains white in colour?; 
Green copper II nitrate crackles on heating, leaving a black solid of copper II oxide. Is such a solid, basic in nature?; 
Zinc nitrate decomposes to form zinc oxide, which is yellow when hot and white when cold. Mercury II nitrate and silver nitrate decompose to give their corresponding metals, brown fumes of nitrogen dioxide gas and a colourless gas that relights a glowing splint. Does ammonium nitrate sublime upon heating to give dinitrogen oxide, ammonia and water vapor?;
Most sulphates are stable when heated gently but on strong heating they decompose forming SO₂ and/or SO₃ and an oxide of a metal. When a hydrated sulphate of potassium or sodium is heated, it loses its water of crystallization and becomes amorphous. Hydrated iron II sulphate and copper II sulphate lose water of crystallization on gentle heating and then decompose on strong heating. Ammonium sulphate melts and then decomposes to form ammonia and ammonium hydrogen sulphate. Sulphates of heavy metals decompose to give metal oxides and white fumes of sulphur trioxide gas. Is it true that when heated more strongly, the sulphur trioxide gas decomposes to give sulphur dioxide and oxygen gas?;
Ammonium chloride sublimes on slight heating and on further heating, it decomposes to give ammonia and hydrogen chloride gases, which can recombine on cooling. Anhydrous metallic chlorides are not affected by heat because they are very stable except anhydrous Iron III chloride that sublimes on heating. Jamila says that however, if the chlorides are hydrated, they lose their water of crystallization except hydrated Iron III chloride that decomposes leaving behind a green solid. Is that right?;
Hydroxides of sodium and potassium are not decomposed by heat. If they are in solid forms, they absorb moisture and melt to form colourless liquids. However, the hydroxides of other metals decompose to give the corresponding oxides and water. On strongly heating lead II hydroxide, Jimmy says a reddish brown solid when hot and yellow when cold is left. Is his deduction right?; 
If an ion is present and is not in the filtrate, then it is in the residue.To a small portion of the test solution, Irene adds sodium hydroxide drop wise until in excess and then gently warms the mixture when there is no observable change. On warming, does a colourless gas with a pungent chocking smell which turns damp red litmus paper blue on warming, confirm the presence of the Carbonate radical?;
When Jane reacts a test solution with sodium hydroxide, a white precipitate insoluble in excess of the strong alkali forms. However, on reaction with ammonia, there is no observable change. Could the two tests work as a confirmatory test for calcium ions in the laboratory?; 
When Irene reacts a test solution with sodium hydroxide, a white precipitate insoluble in excess of the strong alkali is formed. She then filters the mixture and keeps the white residue. She dissolves the obtained residue in a reasonable amount of an acid to dissolve the suspected calcium or magnesium hydroxides. To a small portion of the resultant solution, she adds aqueous ammonia solution dropwise until in excess. Her deduction is no observable change. Does it mean that magnesium ions should be confirmed present?; 
When Zikanga reacts a test solution with sodium hydroxide, a white solid, soluble in excess to form a colourless solution forms. However, on reaction with aqueous ammonia, a similar observation as with sodium hydroxide is obtained. Does it mean that zinc ions should be confirmed present?;  
To a small portion of the test solution in a test tube, Irene adds 3 drops of potassium iodide solution. A bright yellow precipitate is formed. Does it mean that aluminium ions should be confirmed present?; 
To a small portion of the test solution in a test tube, Irene adds 3 drops of dilute sulphuric acid. A white precipitate is formed. Does it mean that lead II ions should be confirmed present?; 
To a small portion of the test solution in a test tube, Irene adds 3 drops of dilute hydrochloric acid. White precipitates are formed that dissolve upon boiling and recrystallise on cooling. Does it mean that zinc ions should be confirmed present?; 
Does an insoluble green precipitate insoluble in excess of either sodium hydroxide solution or aqueous ammonia, confirm the presence of Fe²⁺?;
Does an insoluble brown/yellow precipitate insoluble in excess of either sodium hydroxide solution or aqueous ammonia, confirm the presence of Fe²⁺?;
Does a pale blue precipitate insoluble in excess of sodium hydroxide but soluble in excess ammonia solution to form a deep blue solution, confirm the presence of Cu²⁺?; 
To the solution under test, Irene adds an equal volume of dilute nitric acid followed by 2-3 drops of Barium nitrate solution. A dense white precipitate is formed. Does it mean that chloride ions should be confirmed present?; 
To the solution under test, Irene adds an equal volume of dilute hydrochloric acid followed by 2-3 drops of Barium chloride solution. A white precipitate is formed. Does it mean that sulphate ions should be confirmed present?; 
To the solution under test, Irene adds an equal volume of dilute nitric acid followed by 2-3 drops of Lead II nitrate solution and boils the mixture. A white precipitate is formed which does not dissolve on boiling. Does it mean that chloride ions should be confirmed present?; 
To a solid substance, Irene adds concentrated sulphuric acid. A gas that forms fumes in moist air, turns moist blue litmus paper red, and forms thick white fumes of ammonium chloride with ammonia, and forms white precipitates of silver chloride with acidified silver nitrate solution, is produced. Does it mean that chloride ions should be confirmed present?;   
To a small portion of the test solution, Irene adds an equal volume of dilute nitric acid followed by 2-3 drops of silver nitrate solution. A white precipitate appears which turns violet on exposure to light and the precipitate is readily soluble in aqueous ammonia. Does it mean that sulphate ions should be confirmed present?;
To a small portion of the test solution, Irene adds an equal volume of dilute nitric acid followed by 2-3 drops of lead II nitrate solution and boils the mixture. A white precipitate forms which dissolves on boiling and recrystallises on cooling. Does it mean that chloride ions should be confirmed present?;
Irene says that carbonates and hydrogen carbonates give off carbon dioxide when they are treated with dilute acids. Jane says that even if, such an observation can't serve as a temporary test for carbonates and hydrogen carbonates. Could Jane be right?; 
To 2cm³ of the test solution, Irene adds 2-3 drops of lead II nitrate solution followed by excess dilute nitric acid. A White precipitate that dissolves in excess nitric acid with effervescence is formed. Does it mean that carbonate or hydrogen carbonate ions should be suspected present?; 
To the test solution, Irene adds magnesium sulphate solution or magnesium chloride solution. There is no observable change. Does it mean that carbonate or hydrogen carbonate ions should be suspected present?;
To the test solution, Irene adds magnesium sulphate solution or magnesium chloride solution. A white precipitate is formed. Does it mean that carbonate ions should be confirmed present?;
Irene says that apart from potassium, sodium and ammonium nitrates, all other nitrates liberate brown fumes of nitrogen dioxide gas when heated strongly. Could the liberation of brown fumes serve as a confirmatory test for a nitrate?; 
To the solution of a substance under test, Irene adds an equal volume of freshly prepared iron II sulphate solution. She then carefully adds a few drops of concentrated sulphuric acid down the sides of a slanting test tube. Since concentrated sulphuric acid is denser than the mixture, it displaces the mixture, sinks and occupies the bottom part of the test tube, forming a separate layer. A brown ring slowly forms where the acid meets the top layer. Does this confirm the presence of a nitrate?;