Theme ***Carbon in the Environment*** "@OMD". TOPIC 7 ***CARBON IN THE ENVIRONMENT*** "36 PERIODS". Competency; The learner investigates the diversity of carbon compounds in the environment. Learning Outcomes; The learner should be able to; a) Understand how and why carbon compounds are used as fuels (k, u); b) Know and appreciate the difference between renewable and non-renewable fuels and understand that non-renewable fuels are not sustainable (k, u); c) Know and appreciate the impact of burning carbon-based fuels on the environment (k, u); d) Understand the processes of making charcoal, but recognise that the use of charcoal as a fuel is cheap, efficient, and sustainable only if it is made from wood that can be regrown easily (u, s); e) Know and appreciate the physical properties and uses of carbon dioxide (k, u); f) Understand how the increase in carbon dioxide in the air can cause the atmosphere and the oceans to get warmer (u); g) Understand what greenhouse gases are, where they come from, and how they are affecting climate (u); h) Understand the origin of hard water in limestone areas and investigate how it can be softened (u, s); j) Understand how the properties and uses of the allotropes of carbon relate to their structures (u). [Assignment 1] {How are the properties and uses of allotropes of carbon related to their structures}. Carbon is an element in period 2 and group IV (Valency 4) in the periodic table with mass number 12 and atomic number 6 (Electronic configuration, 2:4). Its symbol is C. Occurrence. Carbon is the fourth most likely abundant element in the universe and it is the building block of life. Carbon occurs in both free states and combined states. In combined states, it occurs as a constituent of numerous naturally occurring substances such as coal, mineral oils, carbonates (e.g., lime stone, marble and sea shells) and all living things (animals and plants). As an element, it occurs in both natural forms (as diamond, pure form of Carbon and graphite, an impure form of Carbon) and synthetic forms (as coke, charcoal and carbon fibre). In air, it occurs to a small but very important extent, 0.003% as carbon dioxide. Carbon is polmorphic. Polymorphism refers to the ability of a substance to exist in different crystal forms or molecular arrangements while maintaining the same chemical composition. Allotropy, a specific type of polymorphism, is caused by the possibility of more than one arrangement of atoms of an element. Allotropy is the existence of an element in different forms in the same physical state. Allotropes are the different forms in which an element exists without change of physical state. An allotrope is one of two or more distinct forms of an element that exist without change of physical state. Different allotropes of the same element always have different crystalline structures and physical properties but the same chemical properties. Carbon is one of those elements that exist in many forms. Most importantly as diamond and graphite. The other forms in which carbon exists are amorphous carbon (e.g., animal charcoal, wood charcoal, lamp black, sugar charcoal, coke and soot) and fullerenes. Other elements which exhibit this characteristic of allotropy include Sulphur (Rhombic sulphur and Monoclinic sulphur) and Phosphorous (Red and White Phosphorous). Allotropes of carbon. Carbon exists in two major allotropic modifications: 1) Diamond. 2) Graphite. Note: Diamond and graphite are sometimes referred to as the crystalline allotropes of carbon. Proof for allotropy of carbon: When equal masses of graphite, diamond and amorphous carbon are separately burnt in excess pure oxygen under the same conditions, each produces the same quantity of a gas that turns lime water milky (carbon dioxide) and no any other product. When 1g of diamond or graphite or amorphous carbon burns in oxygen, they form 3.67g of carbon dioxide only. This proves that graphite, diamond and amorphous carbon are made of the same substance, carbon. Diamond. Diamond is a colourless, crystalline, sparkling and transparent solid that glitters. It is the hardest natural substance ever known. It is the purest form of a non-metal, carbon. Structure of diamond. In diamond, the structure consists of an infinite number of carbon atoms. Each carbon atom in diamond is bonded to four other carbon atoms by strong covalent bonds resulting into a tetrahedral arrangement. The coordination number of each carbon atom is four, meaning that each carbon atom is surrounded by four other carbon atoms. From the structure, the valence electrons are all used in forming covalent bonds and they are therefore localised. The carbon atoms in diamond are tetrahedrally arranged and are equidistant from each other. The bonding extends in 3 dimensions to give a diamond crystal, a giant three-dimensional atomic structure. Figure174.2.4.carbon_in_the_environment_image_001.jpg. Physical properties of diamond. 1) It’s a non-conductor of electricity, because all the electrons in the carbon atoms have been used for bonding. There are no delocalized (mobile) electrons in diamond. 2) It has a high density, due to close packing of carbon atoms. The density of diamond is 3.5gcm⁻³. 3) It’s a colourless, crystalline, sparkling and transparent solid that glitters. 4) It’s the hardest natural substance known. This is because the carbon atoms are closely parked and are joined by strong covalent bonds. 5) It is resistant to melting. Melting point of diamond is around 3930⁰C. The high melting point of diamond is because of the strong covalent bonds between the carbon atoms. Uses of diamond. 1) It’s used in making jewellery such as necklaces and ear rings. It has a very high refractive index and thus it can refract light producing sparkling brilliance. 2) It’s used for making drilling machines, rock borers and glass cutters because of its hardness. 3) Diamond is bright and is used to make laser beams. 4) It can be used as an insulator because it is non-conductor of electricity. Graphite. Graphite exists as black soft slippery hexagonal crystals and naturally, it is found under the ground as an impure form called plumbago. Structure of graphite. Graphite consists of an infinite number of carbon atoms, each covalently bonded to three other carbon atoms forming hexagonal rings that are arranged in layers in parallel planes. This leaves every carbon atom at the corner of the hexagonal layer with one free electron that moves freely within the parallel layers. Each layer is a giant two-dimensional structure. The layers lie on top of each other and are held by weak Vander Waal’s forces of attraction allowing the movement of the planes parallel to each other and this makes graphite slippery and very soft. Note: Graphite conducts electricity because of the delocalized electrons within its layers. Figure175.2.4.carbon_in_the_environment_image_002.jpg. Physical properties of graphite. 1) Graphite is black, shiny and opaque. 2) It’s soft, greasy or soapy because its layers are held by weak Vander Waal's forces of attraction. The parallel layers can slide over one another due to the weak forces holding them. 3) It’s a good conductor of electricity because of the many free mobile electrons. 4) It has low density (2.3gcm⁻³) compared to diamond because the parallel layers do not pack closely together. Graphite is less resistant to chemical attack than diamond because of the open spaces between the layers. 5) The melting point of graphite is high because of the strong covalent bond between the carbon atoms. Uses of graphite. 1) It’s used as a lubricant especially in small bearings like those in dynamos and vacuum cleaner motors which requires little but regular lubrication because of its slippery nature. 2) It’s used as an electrode during electrolysis, in a blast furnace and in batteries because it is a good conductor of electricity due to the presence of delocalized electrons. When an electric field is applied, these electrons move freely, conducting electric current. 3) It’s used in the manufacturer of lead pencils because it’s soft, opaque and black. Graphite is mixed with clay to make pencil leads. 4) Graphite is used to make brushes for electric motors. 5) Graphite (black lead) is used as a protective coating on iron to prevent rusting. 6) It is used in atomic piles in which uranium atoms split up to form energy. Differences between graphite and diamond. Figure175.2.4.carbon_in_the_environment_image_102.jpg. Video15.Chemistry_Revision_Graphite.mp4. Graphene: Graphene was discovered in 2004 and is made up of single layers of graphite. It is a single layer of carbon atoms arranged in a two-dimensional honeycomb lattice. It is also the basic building block of some other carbon structures. Properties of Graphene: Graphene is one of the strongest materials ever discovered that is extremely thin, being just one atom thick. It exhibits excellent electrical and thermal conductivity properties, due to the delocalized electrons. In fact, graphene is able to conduct electricity, one million times better than copper. Uses: Graphene has potential applications in electronics, such as in transparent conductive films, flexible electronics, and high-speed transistors, due to its excellent electrical properties. Graphene-based materials are being researched on, for use in batteries and supercapacitors due to their high surface area and electrical conductivity. Graphene-based sensors are being developed for various applications, including biomedical sensing and environmental monitoring, due to their sensitivity and high surface area. Fullerenes. Fullerenes are a new allotrope of carbon, a special type of carbon molecules shaped like tiny soccer balls. They're made of 60 carbon atoms arranged in a pattern of hexagons (like honeycombs) and pentagons (like on a soccer ball). These molecules have some interesting features. First, they're not very strong magnets to each other, so they melt at a lower temperature than other carbon materials like graphite or diamonds. They also can conduct electricity because of the way their electrons move around inside them. But what's really cool about fullerenes is how they can carry things, like drugs or genetic material. Their soccer ball shape lets them trap these substances inside, protecting them and delivering them to where they're needed in the body. Fullerenes are being used as antioxidants and they have the potential to improve the effectiveness of medicines while reducing side effects. They could also be used to create new types of electronic devices. Buckminsterfullerene is the simplest fullerene having a spherical structure and 60 carbon atoms covalently bonded together. Video16.Graphene_and_Fullerenes.mp4. Other allotropes of carbon include; Glassy carbon, Carbon nanotubes, Carbon nanofibers and Lonsdaleite. These allotropes, along with other carbon-based substances like carbon fibres exemplify the remarkable versatility of carbon in forming various molecular arrangements. Carbon fibres are composed of carbon atoms bonded together in a crystalline alignment to form a long chain. They have a high strength-to-weight ratio and are flexible. Properties of Carbon fibres: Carbon fibres exhibit exceptional strength, making them suitable for reinforcing composite materials. They are lightweight, contributing to the overall weight reduction of composite structures. Uses: Carbon fibre-reinforced composites are widely used in aerospace applications, such as aircraft and spacecraft, due to their high strength and low weight. Carbon fibre composites are used in the manufacturing of sports equipment like tennis rackets, bicycles, and golf clubs for their lightweight and strong properties. Carbon fibre components are increasingly used in high-performance automotive applications to reduce weight and improve fuel efficiency. Much as the carbon fibres have excellent properties, and as a result, a wide range of uses, they are relatively expensive when compared to other similar fibres such as glass fibres or plastic fibres. • In groups, research and make models to explain the structures of diamonds and graphite, and explain how the properties determine the uses of carbon structures such as carbon fibres and graphene. • You can search the web for digital models of the structure of diamond and graphite. Amorphous carbon. These are forms of carbon without clearly defined shape or form. Amorphous carbon exists in many forms such as wood charcoal, animal charcoal, sugar charcoal, lampblack and coke. These forms are black, opaque, dull and have the lowest densities among all the allotropes of carbon. They are non-crystalline and fairly conduct electricity since they are found to contain few crystals of graphite joined together by a variety of impurities. They can be used for electronic displays. [Assignment 2] {Describe the processes of making charcoal and provide the advantages and disadvantages of using wood charcoal}. 1) Wood Charcoal. This is made by burning wood in a limited supply of air (destructive distillation of wood). It is often made by the people in rural areas and used mainly by people in urban areas. Pieces of wood covered with damp soil are heated in a limited supply of air. Heating removes moisture and other volatile components such as methane, hydrogen, tar, etc., from the wood, leaving behind charcoal. Softwoods are avoided because they burn for less time, which makes it more difficult to make charcoal, especially when done on a small scale. Charcoal from hard wood also has a higher energy content and is easier to handle. Wood charcoal is a black porous solid that is used in gas masks as it is a good absorbent for gases such as ammonia, chlorine and bromine. It’s used as a fuel in homes, for cooking and ironing clothes. The use of wood charcoal as a fuel is cheap and efficient but it is sustainable only if it can be made from wood that can be regrown easily. 2) Animal Charcoal. It’s made by heating animal bones and remains in a limited supply of air (destructive distillation of animal bones and remains). It contains a lot calcium phosphate and can be used as a fertilizer. Animal charcoal is used to purify substances and has a property of absorbing colouring matter and is thus used to remove brown colour from sugar during its manufacture, making it white. It’s used for treating snake bites as magic stone. Bone charcoal has adsorbing properties. Once placed at the snake bite wounds and pressed hard for some time, the animal charcoal adsorbs the snake poison. Unlike charcoal from wood which burns for a shorter time (1-2 hours), charcoal briquettes made from waste organic materials and charcoal dust burn longer (5-6 hours) and are environmentally friendly. The procedure of converting organic waste into charcoal briquettes could be as follows: Begin by drying the organic waste thoroughly to prepare it for processing; Select and sort the dried materials, opting for those that are brown in colour and dry; Eliminate any unwanted materials from the selection to ensure purity in the resulting briquette; Transfer the chosen materials into a metal drum and apply heat while periodically turning them to promote even burning; Once smoke production diminishes and flames emerge, allow the contents to settle for a few minutes before covering the drum with a lid; Cease the application of heat and leave the drum undisturbed for approximately 20-25 minutes; After the designated time, verify that the materials inside have transformed into charcoal pieces (char); Extract the char from the drum and lightly sprinkle it with water to prevent further combustion; Utilize a mortar and pestle to crush the char into a fine powder; Then prepare a thick paste by combining cassava flour with hot water; Blend the powdered char with the thick paste, ensuring sufficient quantities to bind the mixture effectively; Shape the resulting blend into compact balls and allow them to air dry thoroughly. The balls are referred to as charcoal briquettes. The general process of making charcoal briquettes involves: (i) Carbonisation (to drive out volatile compounds and moisture); (ii) Preparation of feed stock; (iii) Binding; (iv) Drying; (v) Compaction/Briquetting using machines such as piston extruders, screw extruders, conical die screw extruders, heated die screw extruders, plain screw extruders and roller presses. Briquettes have a potential to be a source of renewable energy if they are made from sustainably harvested biomass or waste agricultural residues. A briquette is a block of compressed coal dust, charcoal dust, saw dust, wood chips or biomass, and is used as a fuel in stoves and boilers. • Individually, research on the making of charcoal from waste organic material, and energy-saving charcoal stoves, and then explain the chemistry of what happens when organic material burns in a limited supply of oxygen. 3) Sugar charcoal. This is a very pure form of carbon made by removing elements of water from sugar. It can be made by dehydrating cane sugar or glucose with concentrated sulphuric acid or by heating sugar in the absence of air to drive off water. Figure176.2.4.carbon_in_the_environment_image_003.jpg. 4) Lampblack. This is formed by burning oils in a limited supply of air. It can be made when petroleum, kerosene, turpentine or candles burn in a limited supply of air. Used as a filler for rubber used to make tyres. Used in printers’ ink, shoe polish, and carbon paper. 5) Coke. Coke is an impure form of carbon made by heating coal in the absence of air (destructive distillation of coal). It is the solid left when coal is heated in limited supply of air. It is used as a reducing agent in the extraction of metals like iron and zinc from their ores. Coke is also used as fuel in furnaces, boilers and ovens.  Advantages of charcoal making include: It is a source of income; Does not require formal skills; Its cheap to make; And, it has a ready market, among many others. However, charcoal making leads to deforestation, and hence in the long run, drought. It also causes air pollution and is inefficient and dirty, creating a large amount of black soot. Charcoal stoves have about 10% efficiency, meaning that 90% of the heat is lost while burning. Energy-saving charcoal stoves can be made by use of clay mixed with vermicutile ingredient. In some cases, iron bars and clay bricks may be used and tiles added to beautify and add value to these stoves. Once lit, the stoves can absorb and retain heat in their thick bodies up to approximately 6 hours. Chemical properties of carbon. Carbon is not a very reactive element. All allotropes of carbon have similar chemical properties but different physical properties. 1) Combustion (Reaction of carbon with oxygen). Carbon burns in a plentiful supply of oxygen to form carbon dioxide gas. In the process, great heat is generated. For this reason, carbon is used as a source of heat. C(s) + O₂(g) → CO₂(g). In limited air, carbon burns to form carbon monoxide (a very poisonous gas). 2C(s) + O₂(g) → 2CO(g). C(s) + ½O₂(g) → CO(g). Burning impure carbon leaves ash. Exhaust fumes from cars contain carbon monoxide because of incomplete combustion of petrol or diesel. Reaction of carbon in a deep, brightly glowing coke/coal fire. Figure177.2.4.carbon_in_the_environment_image_004.jpg. In region A, plenty of air is available. Carbon burns to carbon dioxide. C(s) + O₂(g) → CO₂(g). In region B, ascending carbon dioxide is reduced by red hot coke to carbon monoxide. CO₂(g) + C(s) → 2CO(g). At the surface, the hot carbon monoxide burns in air to form carbon dioxide with a flickering blue flame. CO(g) + ½O₂(g) → CO₂(g). If the charcoal burner is in a poorly ventilated room with insufficient air, the reaction at the surface fails to take place. The poisonous carbon monoxide is released into the room. If one stays in such a room, they may die within a short while due to carbon monoxide poisoning (We will cover this in detail later in this chapter). 2) Reaction with Acids. Carbon reduces nitric acid and sulphuric acid to nitrogen dioxide and sulphur dioxide gases respectively. The carbon itself is oxidized to carbon dioxide gas. (i) Reaction with concentrated sulphuric acid. Concentrated sulphuric acid oxidizes carbon to carbon dioxide which turns lime water milky and itself is reduced to water and sulphur dioxide which turns acidified potassium dichromate from orange to green. C(s) + 2H₂SO₄(aq) → 2H₂O(l) + CO₂(g) + 2SO₂(g). (ii) Reaction with concentrated nitric acid. Concentrated Nitric acid oxidizes carbon to carbon dioxide and itself reduced to nitrogen dioxide which appears as reddish-brown fumes. C(s) + 4HNO₃(aq) → 2H₂O(l) + CO₂(g) + 4NO₂(g). 3) Reducing Action of Carbon. Metals higher than carbon in the reactivity series have a higher affinity for oxygen and will not give it up to carbon. However, carbon readily removes oxygen from (reduces) oxides of metals lower than it in the reactivity series (K [Possiano], Na [Son], C [come], Mg [Making], Al [A], C [Carbonic], Zn [Z], Fe [In], Sn [The], Pb [Left], H [Hand], Cu [Continue], Hg [My], Ag [Silly], Au [Gold], Pt [Please]). Thus, it acts as a reducing agent and it is oxidised to carbondioxide. Carbon reduces the oxides of zinc, lead, iron and copper to form a metal and carbondioxide. (i) 2PbO(s) + C(s) → 2Pb(s) + CO₂(g). (ii) 2ZnO(s) + C(s) → 2Zn(s) + CO₂(g). (iii) 2CuO(s) + C(s) → 2Cu(s) + CO₂(g). (iv) 2Fe₂O₃(s) + 3C(s) → 4Fe(s) + 3CO₂(g). Note: Oxidation–reduction takes place in reactions for the reducing action of carbon. This technique is used in the extraction of metals such as lead, iron and zinc. 4) Reaction with calcium oxide. 3C(s) + CaO(s) → CaC₂(s) + CO(g). 5) Reaction with steam. If steam is blown through red hot charcoal, a mixture of carbon monoxide and hydrogen gases are formed. This mixture is called water gas. H₂O(g) + C(s) → CO(g) + H₂(g). Exercise. 1(a) Describe the structure of; (i) Diamond. (ii) Graphite. (b) Give three properties of diamond and graphite. (c) Give two uses of diamond and graphite basing on the properties in (b). 2(a) What is allotropy? (b) Name the two allotropes of carbon. (c) Give four differences between the allotropes of carbon named in (b). (d) State 5 forms of amorphous carbon and give the uses of each form. 3 (a) Describe an experiment to show that diamond and graphite are allotropes of carbon. (b) State what is observed and write equation for the reaction when carbon reacts with the following: (i) Concentrated sulphuric acid. (ii) Concentrated nitric acid. (iii) Copper (II) Oxide. (iv) Lead (II) oxide. (v) Zinc oxide. Compounds of carbon. [Assignment 3] {What are the physical properties and uses of carbon dioxide}. Carbon dioxide. Carbon dioxide is a chemical compound composed of one atom of carbon and two atoms of oxygen that occurs in air and occupies 0.03% by volume. Carbon dioxide is a waste product of respiration in living organisms; It also forms from rocks as a result of volcanic eruption; occurs in mines and it is always present in natural drinking water because it is slightly soluble in it. It was first identified by a Scottish chemist and physician Joseph Black in the 1750’s. Laboratory preparations of Dry Carbon dioxide. In the laboratory, carbondioxide is prepared by reacting a carbonate with dilute acid. Usually calcium carbonate (marble chips) and dilute hydrochloric acid are used to prepare carbondioxide. Figure178.2.4.carbon_in_the_environment_image_005.jpg. Dilute hydrochloric acid is poured down the thistle funnel on to calcium carbonate in the flask. Effervescence occurs and a colourless gas is evolved. The gas is passed through a concentrated solution of potassium hydrogen carbonate (or distilled water) in a wash bottle to remove hydrochloric acid spray (traces of hydrogen chloride gas). Its then passed through another wash bottle containing concentrated sulphuric acid or through a U-tube containing fused calcium chloride to dry it. Figure179.2.4.carbon_in_the_environment_image_006.jpg. The gas is then collected by down ward delivery or upward displacement of air as it’s denser than air. If the gas is not required dry, it can be simply collected over water as it is only slightly soluble in water. Figure180.2.4.carbon_in_the_environment_image_007.jpg. CaCO₃(s) + 2HCl(aq) → CaCl₂(aq) + H₂O(l) + CO₂(g). CO₃²⁻(aq) + 2H⁺(aq) → H₂O(l) + CO₂(g). Dilute Sulphuric acid is not used in the place of dilute hydrochloric acid in the preparation of carbon dioxide because the salt formed (calcium sulphate) forms a coating on the surface of calcium carbonate which prevents further reaction between the acid and the calcium carbonate as the calcium sulphate coating is sparingly soluble. The reaction therefore stops prematurely (For more details, refer to your notes on salts). Lead (II) carbonate is also not used because when it reacts with dilute hydrochloric acid or sulphuric acid, the reaction soon slows down and then stops. This is due to the formation of lead (II) chloride or lead (II) sulphate, both of which are insoluble salts. The insoluble salt coats the carbonate preventing it from reacting with the acid. Physical properties of carbon dioxide. 1) It’s a colourless and odourless gas. 2) It is denser than air, that is why it is collected by down ward delivery. 3) It does not support combustion. Because of its density, it is also used as a fire extinguisher as it displaces oxygen that supports burning. Figure181.2.4.carbon_in_the_environment_image_008.jpg. 4) It’s slightly soluble in water, forming carbonic acid, which partially ionizes to produce hydrogen ions that make the solution weakly acidic (the solution turns moist blue litmus paper pink). CO₂(g) + H₂O(l) ↔ H₂CO₃(aq). Under high pressure, carbon dioxide is quite soluble in frizzy drinks (effervescent drinks). Test for carbon dioxide. Carbon dioxide can be tested for by passing the gas into a solution of calcium hydroxide (lime water) which turns milky due to the formation of calcium carbonate. CO₂(g) + Ca(OH)₂(aq) → CaCO₃(s) + H₂O(l). • In groups, draw on prior learning to make carbon dioxide by reacting limestone with dilute hydrochloric acid, use apparatus to collect the gas, and then explain the chemical reaction and the property when tested with a lighted splint. Reactions of carbondioxide. 1) Reaction with water. Carbondioxide dissolves slightly in water forming carbonic acid which turns litmus solution pale-red. CO₂(g) + H₂O(l) ↔ H₂CO₃(aq). 2) Reaction with lime water (calcium hydroxide solution). When carbondioxide is passed through a solution of calcium hydroxide, it turns milky. This is due to the formation of insoluble calcium carbonate (white precipitate). This is the test used to distinguish carbon dioxide from any other gas. CO₂(g) + Ca(OH)₂(aq) → CaCO₃(s) + H₂O(l). Figure182.2.4.carbon_in_the_environment_image_009.jpg. However, when excess carbondioxide is passed, the calcium hydroxide solution will clear again, due to the formation of soluble calcium hydrogen carbonate. CaCO₃(s) + H₂O(l) + CO₂(g) → Ca(HCO₃)₂(aq). 3) Reaction with other alkalis. When carbondioxide (an acidic gas) is bubbled through fairly cold concentrated sodium hydroxide or potassium hydroxide or when a jar of carbondioxide is placed in a trough containing fairly cold concentrated sodium hydroxide or potassium hydroxide, the gas is readily absorbed. The solution remains clear due to the formation of a soluble carbonate. In the gas jar experiment, the solution quickly rises into the jar because the gas is rapidly absorbed by the solution. 2NaOH(aq) + CO₂(g) → Na₂CO₃(aq) + H₂O(l). 2KOH(aq) + CO₂(g) → K₂CO₃(aq) + H₂O(l). CO₂(g) + 2OH⁻(aq) → CO₃²⁻(aq) + H₂O(l). Bubbling a mixture of gases through a fairly cold concentrated sodium hydroxide or potassium hydroxide is sometimes used to remove carbon dioxide from the mixture. However, when excess carbondioxide is bubbled through the sodium hydroxide solution for some time, a white solid (sodium hydrogen carbonate), sparingly soluble in cold water, appears on the bottom of the boiling tube. Na₂CO₃(aq) + H₂O(l) + CO₂(g) → NaHCO₃(s). CO₃²⁻(aq) + H₂O(l) + CO₂(g) → 2HCO₃⁻(s). But when carbon dioxide gas is bubbled through the solution of potassium hydroxide, there is no observable change as the product formed is still soluble. K₂CO₃(aq) + H₂O(l) + CO₂(g) → 2KHCO₃(aq). CO₃²⁻(aq) + H₂O(l) + CO₂(g) → 2HCO₃⁻(aq). Please note that when solid sodium hydroxide is simply exposed to air, a colourless solution is formed and later a crystalline solid is formed. Sodium hydroxide is deliquescent and therefore absorbs water from the air to form a solution that absorbs carbondioxide from air forming a white crystalline solid of sodium carbonate decahydrate. NaOH(aq) + H₂O(l) + CO₂(g) → 2Na₂CO₃.10H₂O(s). 4) Reaction with Magnesium. Carbon dioxide does not support burning. However, when a piece of burning magnesium is lowered into a gas jar of carbon dioxide, it continues to burn for a short time with a sputtering flame, forming black particles on the sides of the gas jar and a white solid. In this case, magnesium reduces carbon dioxide to carbon and itself is oxidized to magnesium oxide. 2Mg(s) + CO₂(g) → 2MgO(s) + C(s). Burning magnesium produces a lot of heat which decomposes carbondioxide into black carbon and oxygen. The oxygen supports the burning of magnesium for a short time forming white magnesium oxide. Figure183.2.4.carbon_in_the_environment_image_010.jpg. When dilute hydrochloric acid is added to the products in a gas jar and shaken, the white powder dissolves in the acid leaving behind carbon. This indicates that carbon dioxide contains carbon and is an oxide of carbon. MgO(s) + 2HCl(aq) → MgCl₂(aq) + H₂O(l). Uses of carbon dioxide. 1) In fire extinguishers, because it does not burn and its denser than air. Carbondioxide being denser than the air, forms a layer around the burning material. It covers the fire and starves it of oxygen thus putting out the fire. 2) It’s used in the manufacture of aerated/carbonated drinks. This is because the solution of the gas in water has a pleasant flavour and taste (the taste of soda water). Although carbondioxide is only slightly soluble, it becomes more soluble under pressure like any other gas. The solution of carbondioxide in water under pressure is sold as “soda water”. The addition of various flavours, sweeteners and colours to soda water results into a variety of soft drinks. When the container is opened, pressure is released and carbondioxide comes out of the solution causing effervescence. 3) Solid carbon dioxide (dry ice) is used as a refrigerating agent. When carbondioxide is cooled to a temperature 0f -78⁰C, it solidifies. As it sublimes, it takes heat from the things around it thus helping to keep them cool. It is commonly used for perishable goods and by ice cream and soft drink vendors as a coolant. 4) Making rain-pieces of solid carbondioxide (dry ice) that can be dropped into the clouds to cool them enough to form rain. This is done in places where there is unreliable rain fall. 5) Dry ice is used to create the smoke effect seen at pop concerts and on television; It is placed in boiling water and it forms thick clouds of white smoke. It stays close to the floor because it is denser than air. 6) It’s used in Ammonia-soda or Solvay process for making sodium hydrogen carbonate and sodium carbonate. 7) Carbondioxide is used in bakeries; When heated, baking powder produces carbondioxide which forms bubbles inside bread and cakes making them light. Other reactions that produce carbon dioxide include: fermentation; combustion of hydrocarbons; respiration and action of heat on carbonates and hydrogen carbonates. Industrial preparation of carbondioxide. a) Burning of carbon (coke). b) Liquefication of air. c) It is obtained as a byproduct during the fermentation of sugars to alcohol (manufacture of alcohol). Figure184.2.4.carbon_in_the_environment_image_011.jpg. d) Decomposition of limestone (calcium carbonate) to produce carbon dioxide and quick lime (calcium oxide) that can then be used to make cement. Quick lime is obtained on a large scale by strongly heating limestone (calcium carbonate) in a lime kiln. During the reaction, limestone decomposes completely to quick lime and carbondioxide. The heat required for the reaction is supplied by burning coke. The quick lime sinks to the bottom of the lime kiln where it is removed. Figure185.2.4.carbon_in_the_environment_image_012.jpg. Uses of quick lime. • Quick lime is used for drying ammonia gas since it is hygroscopic. • Quick lime is used in the manufacture of cement. Cement is impure calcium oxide. It is a mixture of quick lime, clay, some sand and silicates. Concrete is a mixture of cement, sand, gravel and water. • Quick lime is used as a fertilizer since it contains calcium ions, a plant nutrient. • Quick lime is used in the manufacture of slaked lime (solid calcium hydroxide). Slaked lime is a solid hydroxide obtained by adding cold water to quick lime. CaO(s) + H₂O(l) → Ca(OH)₂(s). When water is added to quick lime, it swells with a hissing sound, liberating a lot of heat and a white solid is formed which cracks and crumbles to form a white powder, called slaked lime. Slaked lime is used to make white wash (quick suspension of slaked lime in water), to smoothen walls of buildings, to soften hard water, to make mortar (a mixture of slaked lime, sand, and water) and sticking bricks as well as plastering walls and as a fertilizer. Carbon monoxide. Carbon monoxide is a toxic, colourless and odourless gas that is produced from incomplete/partial combustion of carbon-containing substances. Preparation of Carbon monoxide. Carbon monoxide is a poisonous gas. For this reason, it is prepared in a fume cupboard. a) Carbon monoxide can be prepared by the action of concentrated sulphuric acid on any of the following compounds. i) Methanoic acid (HCOOH). Concentrated sulphuric acid is a very strong dehydrating agent and removes water from methanoic acid forming carbon monoxide and water. Figure186.2.4.carbon_in_the_environment_image_013.jpg. ii) Sodium methanoate (HCOONa). Figure187.2.4.carbon_in_the_environment_image_014.jpg. Here, concentrated sulphuric acid dehydrates sodium methanoate to form water, sodium hydrogen sulphate and carbon monoxide. No heating required. HCOONa(s) + H₂SO₄(aq) → NaHSO₄(aq) + CO(g) + H₂O(l). 3) From Ethanedioic acid (Oxalic acid). Dehydration of oxalic acid using concentrated sulphuric acid. Figure188.2.4.carbon_in_the_environment_image_015.jpg. Concentrated sulphuric acid is poured down the thistle funnel on to oxalic acid crystals in the flask and the mixture gently warmed. Oxalic acid crystals dissolve, Effervescence of colourless gases evolved. The mixture of gases is passed through a wash bottle containing concentrated potassium hydroxide solution to absorb carbondioxide. Carbon monoxide passes and is collected over water by upward delivery because it’s less dense than air. Figure189.2.4.carbon_in_the_environment_image_016.jpg. If the carbon monoxide is required dry, it is passed through a bottle containing concentrated Sulphuric acid and is collected by use of a syringe or downward displacement of air. Note: The reaction between concentrated sulphuric acid and oxalic acid is called a dehydration reaction because elements of water are removed from the oxalic acid by the concentrated sulphuric acid (a drying agent). b) From carbon dioxide. Figure190.2.4.carbon_in_the_environment_image_017.jpg. Carbon dioxide is passed over red-hot charcoal in a combustion tube. Excess carbon dioxide is passed through a wash bottle containing concentrated Potassium hydroxide solution to absorb it. C(s) + CO₂ → 2CO(g). CO₂(g) + 2KOH(aq) → K₂CO₃(aq) + H₂O(l). Physical properties of carbon monoxide. 1) It’s colourless, tasteless and odourless. 2) It’s neutral to litmus. 3) It’s slightly less dense than air. 4) It’s only slightly soluble in water. Test for carbon monoxide. Carbon monoxide burns in air with a pale blue flame to form carbon dioxide. Reactions of carbon monoxide. 1) Combustion: Carbon monoxide burns in air with a pale blue flame forming carbon dioxide. For this reason, it is not used in a fire extinguisher because it supports burning. 2CO(g) + O₂(g) → 2CO₂(g). 2) Reducing Action. Carbon monoxide is quite a strong reducing agent and reduces oxides of copper, lead, iron and Zinc to their respective metals and itself is oxidized to carbon dioxide. Please refer to the reducing action of carbon earlier covered in this chapter to relate the explanations. This reaction is used to extract metals from their oxides (Illustrated in detail in topic 16 (form four), industrial process). (i) Effect of carbon monoxide on copper (II) oxide. Figure191.2.4.carbon_in_the_environment_image_018.jpg. Dry carbon monoxide reduces black copper (II) oxide to a brown solid and a colourless gas that turns lime water is evolved. CuO(s) + CO(g) → Cu(s) + CO₂(g). (ii) When carbon monoxide gas is passed over heated lead (II) oxide, a grey metallic lead is formed. PbO(s) + CO(g) → Pb(s) + CO₂(g). (iii) Fe₂O₃(s) + 3CO(g) → 2Fe(s) + 3CO₂(g). This reaction occurs at high temperature in the blast furnace. (iv) ZnO(s) + CO(g) → Zn(s) + CO₂(g). Carbon monoxide as a polutant. Car exhaust fumes contain carbon monoxide formed by incomplete combustion of fuel. 2C₈H₁₈(l) (Petrol) + 17O₂(g) → 16CO(g) + 18H₂O(g). In a charcoal stove, carbon monoxide is produced when carbon burns in the absence of air. The reaction can occur in two stages: Carbon burns in oxygen to form carbon dioxide. C(s) + O₂(g) → CO₂(g). The carbon dioxide reacts with more carbon to form carbon monoxide. CO₂(g) + C(s) → 2CO(g). The carbon monoxide burns in more oxygen with a blue flame to form carbondioxide. 2CO(g) + O₂(g) → 2CO₂(g). Poisonous nature of carbon monoxide. Blood contains red haemoglobin, which combines with oxygen to form oxy-haemoglobin. This moves to all parts of the body and supplies them with oxygen. Haemoglobin however, has a higher affinity for carbon monoxide than oxygen. Carbon monoxide forms a stable compound with haemoglobin in red blood cells, preventing oxygen from binding with it. It combines with haemoglobin to form bright red substances, carboxyhaemoglobin which stops blood from carrying oxygen. This deprives an individual’s cells of oxygen. The affected individual develops headaches, fatigue and they can even die of suffocation. Carbon monoxide is even more dangerous since it has no colour and smell. Supplying excess air to ensure complete combustion and fitting vehicles with catalytic converters can reduce the amount of carbon monoxide from combustion of carbon containing compounds. Uses of carbon monoxide. a) It is used extensively in the extraction of metals as a reducing agent e.g., extraction of iron in a blast furnace and in the refining of nickel. b) It is used as fuel in form of producer gas and water gas. Producer gas is produced when air is passed over red-hot coke. c) It is used in the manufacture of methanol used in anti-freezer mixtures in cold countries to prevent ice from forming in car radiators. d) It is used in the manufacture of synthetic petrol. Producer gas. This is fuel gas consisting of carbon monoxide gas and nitrogen gas in the ratio (1:2). This gas is made into two stages; Coke is heated in excess air to form carbondioxide gas. C(s) + O₂(g) → CO₂(g). Carbondioxide produced is reacted with more soot at elevated temperature to form carbon monoxide. CO₂(g) + C(s) → 2CO(g). The carbon monoxide and unreacted nitrogen obtained by fractional distillation of air forms producer gas. Producer gas is used to heat the retorts during the manufacture of Zinc to heat lime kilns, steel furnaces and glass furnaces. It’s also a source of nitrogen during the manufacture of ammonia in the Haber process. Water gas. Water gas, also known as synthesis gas or syngas, is a fuel gas consisting of an equal volume of carbon monoxide and hydrogen. The gas is prepared by passing steam over coke heated to a very high temperature. During the reaction, carbon monoxide and hydrogen gases are formed. Figure192.2.4.carbon_in_the_environment_image_019.jpg. Water gas is used as a source of fuel gas for heating. It acts as an industrial source for hydrogen gas. It is used for making methanol by passing more hydrogen gas through the mixture. CO(g) + 2H₂(g) → CH₃OH(l). Note: Water gas is a better source of fuel than producer gas because it produces a lot of heat far more than that of producer gas. The hydrogen gas and carbon monoxide gas of water gas both burn to produce heat but for producer gas, it is only the carbon monoxide gas that burns to produce heat. Both carbon dioxide and carbon monoxide are colourless, odourless and do not support combustion. The differences between carbon dioxide and carbon monoxide are shown in the figure below; Figure193.2.4.carbon_in_the_environment_image_020.jpg. Carbonates and hydrogen carbonates. Some carbonates occur naturally in rock formation. The common examples are marble, chalk and limestone which are different mineral forms of the same carbonate. Aluminium carbonate doesn’t exist and salts of aluminium undergo hydrolysis in aqueous solutions producing oxonium ions (H₃O⁺) ions that make their aqueous solutions acidic. Hydrogen carbonates are acid salts of carbonic acid formed by the replacement of only one the hydrogen ions by a metal ion or ammonium radical. Magnesium and Calcium hydrogen carbonates exist only in solution; An attempt to isolate solid calcium hydrogen carbonate and magnesium hydrogen carbonate causes them to decompose. Laboratory preparation of sodium carbonate. Figure194.2.4.carbon_in_the_environment_image_021.jpg. Bubble carbon dioxide into a moderately concentrated sodium hydroxide solution for some time until a white solid is formed. 2NaOH(aq) + CO₂(g) → Na₂CO₃(aq) + H₂O(l). Na₂CO₃(aq) + H₂O(l) + CO₂(g) → 2NaHCO₃(s). Filter off the solid, wash it 2-3 times with a little cold distilled water and dry it. Transfer the solid to a hard glass tube and heat strongly until no further water vapor and carbon dioxide are given off. Sodium carbonate is left as a fine white powder. 2NaHCO₃(s) → Na₂CO₃ (s) + CO₂(g) + H₂O(g). If the crystalline form (washing soda) is required, dissolve the anhydrous powder in a minimum amount of hot water and crystallize to obtain Na₂CO₃.10H₂O (washing soda). Na₂CO₃(aq) + 10H₂O(l) → Na₂CO₃.10H₂O(s). Washing soda, Na₂CO₃.10H₂O (Sodium carbonate decahydrate), a large translucent crystal, on exposure to air, loses mass and becomes coated with a fine powder which renders it opaque. Each molecule of washing soda gives up 9 molecules of water of crystallization. This process of giving up water of crystallization to the atmosphere is termed as efflorescence. The substance that loses its water of crystallization is known as an efflorescent substance. Na₂CO₃.10H₂O(s) → Na₂CO₃.H₂O(s) (Sodium carbonate monohydrate) + 9H₂O(g). Washing soda is used for softening water by precipitating the calcium and/or magnesium ions from their solutions as their respective carbonates. [Assignment 4] {Explain in detail, the origin of hard water in limestone areas and investigate how it can be softened}. When it rains, the naturally soft water from the rain dissolves carbondioxide to form carbonic acid. When water containing carbonic acid flows over rocks containing limestone, the lime dissolves to form calcium hydrogencarbonate which when discharged in water causes temporary hardness. CO₂(g) + H₂O(l) ↔ H₂CO₃(aq). H₂CO₃(aq) + CaCO₃(aq) → Ca(HCO₃)₂(aq). H₂CO₃(aq) + MgCO₃(aq) → Mg(HCO₃)₂(aq). As earlier covered in our form one, hard water uses a lot of soap. We learnt that this is because the soap first reacts with magnesium and calcium ions present in the hard water, forming a white precipitate known as scum. Sodium stearate (in soap) + calcium or magnesium sulphate (in water) → calcium or magnesium stearate (scum) + sodium sulphate. It is not until magnesium and calcium ions have been precipitated out, that the soap will form lather with water. Soapless detergents that don't produce scum with water can be used. The water samples that easily form lather with soap are referred to as soft water. From our previous classes, we learnt that the method of water softening depends on the type of water hardness. Water hardness can be temporary or permanent. Temporary hardness of water can be removed by boiling while permanent hardness of water can’t be removed by boiling. On boiling temporary hard water in kettles and pans, solids commonly known as fur form. On boiling, the heat decomposes the soluble hydrogen carbonates into insoluble carbonates. Ca(HCO₃)₂(aq) + Heat → CaCO₃(s) + H₂O(l) + CO₂(g). Mg(HCO₃)₂(aq) + Heat → MgCO₃(s) + H₂O(l) + CO₂(g). The fur, which is a layer of precipitates of calcium or magnesium carbonate is a bad conductor of heat leading to wastage of fuel. Fur on a kettle or pan can be removed by the addition of a little vinegar (acetic acid); The vinegar only attacks the carbonates not the metal. Hard water forms boiler scale inside boilers by the same reactions that form fur. And just like fur, boiler scale too, is a poor conductor of heat and hence wastes fuel. It also causes blockages in hot water pipes. Figure195.2.4.carbon_in_the_environment_image_022.jpg. Figure196.2.4.carbon_in_the_environment_image_023.jpg. Figure197.2.4.carbon_in_the_environment_image_024.jpg. As previously mentioned, washing soda can be used for softening water by precipitating the calcium and/or magnesium ions from their solutions as their respective carbonates. Washing soda dissolves in water and reacts with calcium ions or magnesium ions which are removed as insoluble carbonates. Ca²⁺(aq) + CO₃²⁻(aq) → CaCO₃(s). Mg²⁺(aq) + CO₃²⁻(aq) → MgCO₃(s). Remember that there are other ways of softening hard water. Revisit your work on the chapter of water covered in form one. The other ways include passing hard water through permutit, a complex substance, to form insoluble calcium or magnesium salts of the permutit. And, distillation is a physical method that removes both temporary and permanent hardness of water. Distillation, however, is a costly method in which water is vaporised and condensed into distilled/deionised (pure and soft) water. Another method that can be used to remove both types of hardness in water is by use of ion exchange. In such a case, the water is passed through a container filled with a suitable resin containing sodium ions. The calcium or magnesium ions causing the hardness are exchanged for the sodium ions in the resin. calcium ion + sodium-resin → calcium-resin + sodium ion. However, there are several advantages of hard water: It contains alot of calcium compounds, usually calcium phosphate, which helps to form healthy teeth and bones in animals; It coats lead pipes with a thin layer of lead (II) sulphate or lead (II) carbonate, cutting down the possibility of lead poisoning which is common in soft water; It has a nice taste and is thus used in the brewing industry; Contains calcium carbonate necessary for the formation of shells of eggs and of many animals such as snails; Creates a beautiful scenery that can act as tourist attractions. Beautiful structures such as stalactites and stalagmites are found in underground caverns in limestone areas. Stalactites are solid structures which grow hanging from the roof of a cave. Stalagmites are solid structures which grow from the floor of a cave. They are deposits of calcium carbonate or magnesium carbonate formed when rain water containing calcium hydrogen carbonate or magnesium hydrogen carbonate evaporates. • In pairs, research on how rainwater becomes hard as it soaks through limestone, and how it affects soap. • In groups, discuss, research and explain on a poster how adding washing soda (sodium carbonate) results in reducing the ‘hardness’. • You can use any word processor to write the required equations and investigation report. Commercial preparation of sodium carbonate (Solvay process). On a large scale, sodium carbonate is manufactured by the Solvay process. Sodium carbonate is manufactured by dropping very concentrated brine (28% Sodium Chloride) slowly down an absorber tower called the carbonator, up which Ammonia passes. The brine becomes saturated with ammonia, forming ammoniacal brine, which flows slowly from the top of the tower while carbon dioxide (formed from decomposition of calcium carbonate) is forced (pressure is applied) to rise up the tower from the base of the tower. The tower is fitted with perforated mushroom shaped baffles at intervals to delay the flow of ammoniacal brine and also increase the surface area for the reaction. The ammoniacal brine reacts with carbon dioxide to form sodium hydrogen carbonate as precipitates since it is not very soluble in water. Precipitation is assisted by cooling the lowest third of the chamber. NH₄OH(aq) + NaCl(aq) + CO₂(g) → NaHCO₃(s) + NH₄Cl(aq). Figure198.2.4.carbon_in_the_environment_image_025.jpg. The sodium hydrogen carbonate precipitates in the lower part of the tower in form of a wet white sludge and is filtered off from the sludge, washed to remove ammonium compounds and heated to form anhydrous sodium carbonate. The anhydrous sodium carbonate (Soda ash) formed has a wide market. 2NH₃(g) + CO₂(g) → NH₄HCO₃(aq). NH₄HCO₃(aq) + NaCl(aq) → NaHCO₃(s) + NH₄Cl(aq). 2NaHCO₃(s) → Na₂CO₃(s) (Soda ash) + CO₂(g) + H₂O(g). Carbon dioxide is recycled for use and ammonia is recovered from the ammonium chloride by reacting ammonium chloride with calcium hydroxide, obtained by adding water to calcium oxide (from the decomposition of calcium carbonate). Ammonia too is recycled for use. CaO(s) + H₂O(l) → Ca(OH)₂(s). 2NH₄Cl(aq) + Ca(OH)₂(s) → 2NH₃(g) + CaCl₂(aq) + 2H₂O(l). Therefore, the end products of the Solvay process are calcium chloride and sodium carbonate. Calcium chloride is used in the extraction of sodium. In some places, particularly in lake Magadi in Kenya, there are natural deposits of calcium carbonate but these are not sufficient to meet the demands of the industry. Uses of sodium carbonate. a) In the making of glass. Ordinary bottle glass is made by fusing together sodium carbonate, calcium carbonate, silicon dioxide (sand) and a little carbon (reducing agent). Broken glasses are added to assist fusion. The resulting mixture produces glass on cooling. b) In the manufacture of water glass that is used to preserve eggs, used in fire proofing and production of cement. c) In domestic water softening. Calcium ions which are the principal cause of hardness in water are precipitated from the water as calcium carbonate by adding sodium carbonate. Ca²⁺(aq) + CO₃²⁻(aq) → CaCO₃(s). Mg²⁺(aq) + CO₃²⁻(aq) → MgCO₃(s). d) In soap industries in the manufacture of dry soap powders. e) In paper and textile industries. Test for carbonates. Put some of the suspected carbonate in a test tube and add dilute nitric acid. If the carbonate is present there will be effervescence and the gas which turns calcium hydroxide solution milky is evolved. Preparation of sodium hydrogen carbonate. Bubble carbondioxide through concentrated sodium hydroxide solution. A white powder is precipitated. Na₂CO₃(aq) + H₂O(l) + CO₂(g) → 2NaHCO₃(s). The sodium hydrogen carbonate is deposited as a white powder which is filtered off, washed 2-3 times with a little cold water and allowed to dry. Uses of sodium hydrogen carbonate. 1) It’s used in baking powder for making cakes and bread. 2) Used for making healthy salts (antacids) to neutralize excess hydrochloric acid in the stomach. 3) It’s used in fire extinguishers. Effects of heat on carbonates and hydrogen carbonates. Metal carbonate → metal oxide + carbon dioxide + water. Metal hydrogen carbonate → Carbonate + Water + carbon dioxide. Figure199.2.4.carbon_in_the_environment_image_026.jpg. Effects of acids on carbonates and hydrogen carbonates. Carbonate + Acid → Salt + water + carbondioxide. CO₃²⁻(aq) + 2H⁺(aq) → H₂O(l) + CO₂(g). Hydrogen carbonate + Acid → Salt + water + carbondioxide. HCO₃⁻(aq) + H⁺(aq) → H₂O(l) + CO₂(g). For more information on carbonates and hydrogen carbonates, please refer to your notes on acids and alkalis and salts. Test for carbonate and hydrogen carbonate. Reagent: Magnesium sulphate solution or Magnesium chloride solution. Add magnesium sulphate solution or magnesium chloride solution to a solution to distinguish between a carbonate and a hydrogen carbonate. Observation: With a carbonate, a white precipitate of magnesium carbonate is formed. Mg²⁺(aq) + CO₃²⁻(aq) → MgCO₃(s). With a hydrogen carbonate, no precipitate forms or the solution remains colourless (no observable change). Mg²⁺(aq) + 2HCO₃⁻(aq) → Mg(HCO₃)₂(aq). However, on heating, the magnesium hydrogen carbonate decomposes to the insoluble magnesium carbonate (white precipitate). Mg(HCO₃)₂(aq) → MgCO₃(s) + 2H₂O(l) + CO₂(g). Carbon Cycle. On earth, carbon circulates through land, oceans and the atmosphere. The balance of processes which give out carbon dioxide and those which use carbon dioxide is called the carbon cycle. It is the carbon cycle that shows how carbon is recycled in nature. Carbon dioxide is added to the atmosphere by: a) Combustion of fuels and decay of organic material: The burning in air of fuels containing carbon e.g., coal (formed as a result of slow decomposition of plants and animals over millions of years), petroleum oil, natural gas and wood produce carbondioxide. When animals and plants die, they undergo decomposition. During this process, organic matter is broken down by micro-organisms and some of the carbon compounds are converted to carbondioxide. b) Respiration: Respiration occurs in living things, and this involves breaking down glucose in cells of living organisms to obtain energy, carbon dioxide that is released to the atmosphere and water. glucose + oxygen → carbon dioxide + water + energy. C₆H₁₂O₆(aq) + 6O₂(g) → 6CO₂(g) + 6H₂O(l) + energy. c) Making lime: Lime is made by heating of lime stone (to give quick lime) in lime kilns. When limestone is heated in limestone kilns, it releases carbondioxide into the atmosphere. CaCO₃(s) → CaO(s) + CO₂(g). d) Making of beer and wines by fermentation of sugar or starch. C₆H₁₂O₆(aq) → 2C₂H₅OH(aq) + 2CO₂(g). e) From water (if the percentage in air drops). H₂CO₃(aq) ↔ CO₂(g) + H₂O(l). Note: Increased amounts of carbon dioxide and other green house gases causes the green-house effect that tends to raise atmospheric temperature. Carbondioxide is removed from the atmosphere by: Solution in water: Rain dissolves carbon dioxide and rivers, lakes, seas and oceans contain much of it. Water containing dissolved calcium hydrogencarbonate eventually gets into the sea through rivers. Calcium hydrogen carbonate is used by marine organisms to form shells. When marine organisms die, they sink to the bottom of the sea where they are buried in sediments. After thousands of years, the sediments are converted into limestone and chalk. These are later raised above the sea by geological movements. Photosynthesis: Green plants absorb carbon dioxide to make sugar. Photosynthesis occurs in plants and involves converting carbon dioxide and water into glucose and oxygen in the presence of sunlight. carbon dioxide + water → glucose + oxygen. 6CO₂(g) + 6H₂O(l) → C₆H₁₂O₆(aq) + 6O₂(g). The glucose is the converted to other organic (carbon) compounds in plants such as carbohydrates, proteins and fats. Animals then obtain carbon from plants by feeding on food such as starch made by plants. This converts carbon compounds in plants into carbon compounds in animals. Hardening of Mortar: Mortar and white wash contain calcium hydroxide which slowly reacts with Carbondioxide to form calcium carbonate. Figure200.2.4.carbon_in_the_environment_image_027.jpg. Note: It is through the carbon cycle that the components of living organisms are made or removed. [Assignment 5] {How and why are carbon compounds used as fuels}. [Assignment 6] {What are the impacts of burning carbon-based fuels on the environment}. [Assignment 7] {What are the differences between renewable and non- renewable fuels and why are non-renewable fuels not sustainable}. Using carbon compounds as fuels. Most of the substances used in our homes to produce heat and light contain carbon. These include firewood, kerosene, natural gas etc. These materials are used as fuels because they give a lot of heat and/or light when burnt in air e.g. CH₄(g) + O₂(g) → CO₂(g) + 2H₂O(g) + heat. Fuels may be made from plants or animals. A fuel is any substance that is burnt to provide heat or power. It’s the chemical energy in carbon-based fuels that is converted to other forms of energy. Most fuels are burnt to obtain their energy in form of heat. The type of fuel used depends on several factors such as its availability, the cost and storage, among many others. Generally, a perfect fuel should be cheap, not pollute the environment, readily available, burn easily producing large amounts of heat, be easily handled, stored and transported. Natural resources. Natural resources are substances or materials that occur naturally in the environment and are used by humans for various purposes. They can be classified into renewable and non-renewable resources. Non-renewable fuels are formed naturally and are available in limited amounts. They can’t be easily replaced due to the long time they take to form. Crude oil is a mixture of many products and when refined by fractional distillation, several useful products are obtained. These include petrol, diesel, paraffin and natural gas (bottled gas). Non-renewable fuels include fossil fuels, nuclear energy and natural gas. Renewable fuels on the other hand are easily formed over a relatively shorter period of time. Renewable fuels include solar energy, hydro power energy, biomass energy, geothermal energy and wind energy. Opting for renewable fuels over non-renewable ones is preferable due to their sustainability and reduced environmental harm. Renewable fuels offer numerous advantages such as reduced maintenance needs, the ability for repeated usage, and environmental benefits due to minimal air pollution emissions. They also serve as reliable sources of energy. However, challenges arise from the necessity for efficient storage solutions, which can be costly, and the susceptibility to interruptions from unpredictable weather events, which can disrupt the consistency of these energy resources. Non-renewable fuels, such as fossil fuels, have traditionally been the backbone of global energy systems. While they are cheap, cheap to convert from one type to another, easy to use and easy to store, providing jobs to many people and a consistent and readily available source of energy, they come with significant drawbacks. These fuels take millions of years to form and thus hard to replace once they have been depleted, leading to energy security concerns and economic instability; They require extensive extraction processes, leading to environmental degradation and ecosystem disruption; Additionally, burning fossil fuels releases high levels of pollutants such as carbon dioxide and sulphur dioxide into the atmosphere, contributing to air pollution, climate change, and adverse health effects. Fossil Fuels. Fossil fuels, categorized as non-renewable energy sources, originate from the decomposition of ancient photosynthetic organisms (plants, algae, phytoplankton, and certain photosynthetic bacteria) that lived millions of years ago, died and were buried deep underground. Fossil fules are accident-prone and the drilling process to obtain them is quite a dangerous process. Coal, petroleum and natural gas are the 3 main fossil fuels. Petroleum is a sticky black liquid and a mixture of hydrocarbons. Natural gas consists mainly of methane. Another carbon containing fuel is wood that is formed when plants die and dry. When these fuels are burnt, a process called combustion, the carbon compounds are oxidised to carbon dioxide. Like other hydrocarbons, when burnt in air, fossil fuels produce water and carbon dioxide (Complete combustion) with generation of heat. Carbon monoxide, unburnt hydrocarbons and soot (mainly carbon) are produced if there is incomplete combustion of carbon containing compounds, i.e., when air provided for burning is not enough. Unburnt hydrocarbons are released due to incomplete combustion of fuels. Breathing in these gases may cause cancer. Ozone is produced when oxides of nitrogen react with unburnt hydrocarbons in the presence of sunlight. At ground level, ozone is a pollutant, as breathing the gas causes respiratory problems. Ozone irritates the eyes and lungs. The ozone layer is found high in the Earth’s atmosphere. Although ozone is regarded as an air pollutant at ground level, the ozone layer has an important role of absorbing excess ultraviolet/UV radiation from the Sun. It has been found out that the ozone layer is depleting and substances such as chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) contribute to this. CFCs are compounds that contain chlorine, fluorine and carbon. Chlorine radicals are produced when CFCs are exposed to UV radiation. These free radicals destroy the ozone layer by reacting with ozone molecules. Ozone depletion would cause more UV radiation to reach the Earth’s surface, which becomes a problem as excess UV radiation causes health issues such as skin cancer and formation of eye cataracts. The use of CFCs has since been banned in most countries. Despite this, ozone depletion will continue as CFCs released long ago are still present in the atmosphere. • In groups, draw on your experience and research to discuss the main uses of common carbon-based fuels in Uganda (charcoal, paraffin, petrol, firewood and diesel). • Individually, use prior learning to write a word equation to show the reaction when carbon-based fuels burn in oxygen. • In groups, discuss and report on the meaning of the terms ‘renewable’ and ‘non-renewable’ as applied to fuels, and then use data to estimate how long the world’s coal, oil and natural gas reserves are likely to last at the current rates of usage. • You can use a spreadsheet to record and calculate the longevity of natural gas reserves. [Assignment 8] {How does the increase in carbon dioxide in the air cause the atmosphere and the oceans to get warmer}. [Assignment 9] {What are greenhouse gases, where do they come from, and how are they affecting climate}. Global Warming. The sun emits radiations that pass through the atmosphere of the earth with little absorption and warms up the surface of the earth (ground). The warm surface of the earth (ground) reflects back the radiations in form of infrared radiations. The infrared radiation is absorbed by gases such as carbon dioxide, water vapour, methane, nitrous oxide and ozone which radiate some heat back to the ground leading to warming up of the earth. The warming up of the earth is known as the greenhouse effect. The gases like carbon dioxide, water vapour and methane that cause the warming up of the earth are referred to as greenhouse gases. A greenhouse gas is a gas in the atmosphere that absorbs and emits radiation within the thermal infrared range. Excessive amounts of greenhouse gases result in a stronger greenhouse effect, which leads to global warming. Global warming refers to the general increase in global temperatures due to the accumulation of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. When greenhouse gases are produced faster than the rate at which they are removed from the atmosphere, an accumulation of these gases causes the atmosphere to warm (global warming) resulting into changes in the climate. Changes in climate lead to flooding, storms, spread of diseases, increase in food insecurity among many others. Acid rain. While pure water has a pH of 7, rain water is usually slightly acidic in unpolluted areas. This is due to the dissolving of carbon dioxide to form carbonic acid (a weak acid). In polluted areas where oxides of nitrogen and sulphur dioxide are present, rain water becomes more acidic. This is due to the formation of strong acids in rain water, such as nitric acid, nitrous acid and Sulphurous acid. Acid rain reacts with structures containing metal or carbonates, causing them to corrode and be destroyed. It destroys aquatic habitats by making them too acidic for aquatic life. The soil pH is also greatly lowered, making it unsuitable for plants to survive. Acid rain also kills fish in fresh water lakes. It can be prevented by fitting motor vehicles with catalytic converters to reduce emissions of carbon monoxide, oxides of nitrogen and unburnt hydrocarbons. Given the numerous disadvantages of the greenhouse gases, measures are being taken globally to prevent adding on to their existing amount in the atmosphere. The burning of fossil fuels for energy needs to be reduced to reduce emissions of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases. To conserve deposits of fossil fuels, alternative energy sources like biogas, biodiesel and alcohols could be used. Some countries are now using alcohol as an additive in petrol to produce a cleaner fuel. In advanced countries, efforts are being made to have all cars on the roads electrified as soon as possible. Biogas made from anaerobic digestion of waste materials and electricity in form hydro power and solar are now being used in homes as alternatives to wood fuel. Catalytic converters are being installed in exhaust systems of cars to reduce the emissions of carbon monoxide, oxides of nitrogen and unburnt hydrocarbons. These substances undergo redox reactions in the presence of platinum and rhodium catalysts to form substances that are less harmful. Carbon monoxide is oxidised to form carbon dioxide. 2CO(g) + O₂(g) → 2CO₂(g). Oxides of nitrogen are reduced to form nitrogen. 2NO(g) + 2CO(g) → N₂(g) + 2CO₂(g). And, unburnt hydrocarbons are further oxidised to form carbon dioxide and water. While sulphur dioxide is not considered a traditional greenhouse gas due to its limited ability to absorb infrared radiation, it is a major air pollutant emitted from industrial processes such as power plants and industrial boilers. Sulphur dioxide is being removed from waste gases emitted from industrial processes through flue gas desulphurisation. This involves passing the waste gases through calcium carbonate or calcium oxide. Sulphur dioxide is removed from these gases as it reacts with basic substances. sulphur dioxide + calcium carbonate → calcium sulphite + carbon dioxide. SO₂(g) + CaCO₃(s) → CaSO₃(s) + CO₂(g). sulphur dioxide + calcium oxide → calcium sulphite. SO₂(g) + CaO(s) → CaSO₃(s). Calcium sulphite then undergoes further oxidation with atmospheric oxygen to form calcium sulphate. calcium sulphite + oxygen → calcium sulphate. 2CaSO₃(s) + O₂(g) → 2CaSO₄(s). Whenever possible, walk or ride to avoid carbon emissions; Use public transport means to limit the number of cars on roads; Turn off lights that are not in use; Avoid bush burning and deforestation; Reuse and recycle plastic materials; Instead of burning fossil fuels, use renewable energy sources; Remove traces of sulphur from fuels before burning; Remove sulphur dioxide from chimney gas(es) of power stations; Modify engines to run on a weaker mixture of fuel and air; Ensure the vehicle engines are well maintained; Replace chlorofluorocarbons with alternative substances serving similar functions; And where you find space, please plant a tree! "Earth provides enough to satisfy every man's needs, but not every man's greed" - Mahatma Gandhi. ***Your Environment, Your Responsibility***. • Individually, research on the idea of ‘sustainability’ and write a report on how the use of fuel in your locality can be made more sustainable. • In groups, discuss and produce posters to explain why air pollution is a global problem and why it can only be properly controlled if all the countries of the world agree to collaborate. • In pairs, research and report on how an increase in carbon dioxide in the air can cause the atmosphere and the oceans to get warmer and explain what that tells us about the nature of carbon dioxide. Then, compare your findings with other learners to explain the effect of carbon dioxide on climate. This chapter is done. Kind regards, OMD;
