The chemical activity of a metal is related to its tendency to form positive ions. From quite simple experiments, metals can be arranged in order of their reactivity. Placing elements in their order of reactivity is termed as the reactivity series. The reactivity series of metals is an important concept in Chemistry and it has implications for corrosion of metals and its prevention, metal extraction and storage of reactive metals. Potassium and copper are usually kept under oil because they are highly reactive with the atmosphere. Is this all true?;
The non-metals, carbon and hydrogen are often included in the reactivity series. This is so crucial when determining the extraction method of a specific metal from its ore. Generally, a more reactive metal displaces a less reactive metal from its compounds. When subjected to different conditions, metals react differently. The reaction of metals with air produces the metal reactivity series from the most reactive to the least reactive. Is this all true?;
To compare the reactivity of metals with water, one should ensure that: The physical state of water is the same. The amount of water or metal used should be maintained. The same time duration should be used. The metals should be in the same state of sub-divisions. The reaction of metals with water can be used to produce the metal reactivity series from the most reactive to the least reactive, a procedure that works well for all metals. Is this all true?;
The rate of a reaction between an acid and a metal depends on the metal used and its position in the reactivity series. Does the reaction between sodium and sulphuric acid proceed faster than the reaction between zinc and sulphuric acid?;
When a mixture of magnesium powder and CuO powder are put in a crucible and heated strongly, the mixture glows red and the black powder changes to a brown solid. However, when a mixture of magnesium oxide and copper are heated, there is no observable change. Does this confirm that copper is more reactive than magnesium and thus placed above magnesium in the reactivity series?;
The more reactive metal will displace the less reactive one from its oxide. When Fe₂O₃ is mixed with Aluminium and the mixture heated strongly using a magnesium fuse, a very violent reaction occurs as the competition between the Aluminium and the Iron for the Oxygen takes place. Aluminium being the more reactive metal, removes oxygen from the less reactive Iron. This is an exothermic reaction that leaves a solid lump of Iron along with a lot of white Aluminium oxide powder. Since large amounts of heat are given out and Iron is formed in a molten state, can this reaction be used in making explosive bombs and in welding together damaged railway lines?;
Aluminium reacts rapidly with oxygen forming a thin coat of Aluminium oxide that can’t be seen which sticks tight to the metal, acting as a barrier preventing further corrosion. Therefore, Aluminium metal protects itself and behaves as if it were nonreactive. Its for this reason that Aluminium though more reactive than Iron is preferred for things like TV aerials, satellite dishes, cooking foil and ladders, without adding any protection to it. All rusting is a form of corrosion and all corrosion results in rusting. Could this be all true?;
For metal elements in the same period, the less the number of electrons required to be lost to form a stable ion, the more reactive the element is. The size of the metal atom also determines the ease with which the atom loses an electron. The bigger the metal atom, the more reactive the element will be. In a big metal atom, the electrons are farther away from the attraction of the nucleus and they therefore require less energy to be removed. In addition, there are more electron shells between the nucleus and outermost electrons. These shells shield the outermost shell electrons from the attraction of the nucleus. Is this all true?;
Generally, the metal atom which readily loses electrons, displaces those which don’t easily lose electrons. The more reactive metal ends up in the compound. A displacement reaction is a reaction involving an element replacing another element from its compound in an aqueous solution or its oxide. For example, in the reaction between iron and CuSO₄ solution, iron that is more reactive, displaces Cu²⁺ ions. The blue solution turns brown and a reddish-brown solid is formed on the surface of the iron. Is this all true?;
Generally, elements displace other elements below them in the reactivity series. Metals lower in the reactivity series are extracted from their oxides using carbon, which readily removes oxygen from their oxides to form a metal and carbondioxide. For example, copper can be extracted from its oxide by heating CuO with charcoal. Does that mean carbon is more reactive than copper?;
To extract copper from its oxide using charcoal, Hanisha creates a small cavity in the charcoal block. She then places about a spatula-endful of CuO in the cavity and wets it with one drop of water. By means of the blow pipe, she directs the Bunsen burner flame onto the CuO in the cavity. She then observes and records what happens to the oxide and the charcoal block. Hanisha says that the brown solid turns to a black solid and bubbles of a colourless gas which turn lime water milky are produced. Is that true?;
When extracting copper from its oxide using charcoal, the carbon in the charcoal may first react with oxygen forming carbon monoxide gas, and then finally, this gas reduces the CuO to copper metal. This indicates that copper is less reactive than Carbon. If a metal is less reactive than carbon, it can be extracted from its oxide by heating the oxide with carbon. Carbon displaces the metal from its oxide by removing oxygen from the oxide, leaving the metal behind. Metals that are less reactive than carbon have been known and used for thousands of years because they can be easily obtained from their ores. Is this all true?; 
Aluminium, Group I and Group II elements are above carbon in the reactivity series and therefore can’t be extracted on a charcoal block since their oxides can’t be reduced by carbon. More reactive metals had to wait until the invention of electrolysis in 1800, for their extraction. Will Jane be able to extract lithium using a charcoal block?;
Carbon and hydrogen are included within the series for reference and more metals like tin, nickel and platinum can be included once more experiments are done. Meaning the new reactivity series could be K, Na, Ca, Mg, Al, C, Zn, Fe, Sn, Pb, H, Cu, Hg, Ag, Au, Pt. Is it true that metals lower in the series have a low affinity for other substances and thus are often found in an uncombined state?;
From the reactivity series, Gold is one of the least reactive metals, hence it exists freely. Gold doesn’t easily react with oxygen, chlorine, water or carbon, hence can be recovered in its pure form from alluvial deposits. Aqua regia doesn't dissolve Gold either. However, a mixture of hydrochloric acid and nitric acid can dissolve Gold. Is this all true?;
The reactivity series enables one predict how metals will react with acids and water. It tells one whether a given metal will displace a metal of interest from its compound. It also enables one choose a metal to act as a sacrificial layer for Iron, one of the metals with a variety of uses. For example, Zinc is used to coat Iron since it is more reactive than Iron. Is it true that to improve the efficiency, appearance and strength of metals, two or more metals or carbon are mixed to form an alloy?;
Gold is preferred for making jewelry. This is because it is rare, has an attractive lustre, doesn't tarnish, doesn't react with air the way some metals do, and is malleable and ductile. Mrs. Muhumuza says that Gold is often alloyed with other metals to make it stronger. Could she be wrong?;
16 or 18 karat gold alloys are usually used for jewelry. White gold, an alloy of Gold with metals like nickel and silver, is a favourite material for wedding rings. Plating white gold with rhodium, gives it more shine. Rose gold is an alloy of gold and copper. When it is alloyed with little copper, it is yellow gold. Gold is blue when alloyed with iron or indium, purple when alloyed with Aluminium, Black when alloyed with cobalt and green when alloyed with silver alone. Can pieces of costume jewelry be plated with the thinnest sheets of gold to enhance their appearance?;
It is the unreactive metals for which we find the most uses. The least reactive iron and copper are found in everyday objects. Aluminium, however, is an exception, due to its ability to self protect. The reactive metals are also used for several other reasons. Annie says that sodium can be used as a coolant in nuclear reactors. Could it be due to the fact that sodium has a high melting point and is a good conductor of heat?;