POPULATION, URBANISATION AND TRADE IN EAST AFRICA. TOPICS 16 – 18: 54 PERIODS. Theme ***Population, Urbanisation and Trade in East Africa; and Trade between East Africa and other parts of the World*** "@OMD". TOPIC 16 ***POPULATION AND URBANISATION IN EAST AFRICA*** "20 PERIODS". Competency; The learner understands and appreciates factors influencing population growth and distribution in East Africa and the effects this has, including effects on environment and urbanization. Learning Outcomes; The learner should be able to; a) understand the concepts related to population (u); b) know the main areas of low and high density of population and the location of the main urban centres of East Africa (k); c) use maps, statistics, graphs and diagrams to analyse population (s); d) understand the demographic transition model and how this relates to the historical growth and population structures of East Africa (u); e) understand the relationship between population, resources and the provision of services (u); f) understand the factors which have led to rapid population increase in Uganda and the rest of East Africa (u); g) understand the relationship between a rapidly growing population and urbanisation (u); h) understand Kampala city as an example of rapid urbanisation and the advantages, disadvantages and problems resulting from urbanisation (u); i) understand the concept of urbanisation, the factors influencing urbanisation, and the functions of urban areas (u); j) appreciate the implications of urbanization for development (v, a); k) use statistics and photographs to illustrate urbanisation and its problems (s); l) understand the methods which can be used to control the rate of population growth (u); m) appreciate the need for, and use of population control methods (v, a, gs); n) appreciate the social and cultural problems of slowing down population growth (v, a, gs); o) appreciate the implications of urbanisation for development (v, a, gs). Population growth • Revision: Revise reasons for population growth: birth and death rates and rate of natural increase, check understanding of terms: population, population density, population distribution, under population, and overpopulation. Distribution and density of population • Use wall map, chalkboard map or atlas or internet to show distribution of population in EastAfrica • list a) areas of high population density; b) moderate population density; c) low population density. Analyse statistics of population for East Africa and draw a map to show areas of high, moderate and low population density in East Africa. • suggest reasons for areas of high and low density. • Work in pairs, use maps and diagrams to select one area of East Africa with a high density of population and one area of low density of population. Explain the reasons for the density of each area and describe the results of the high or low density. Feedback to whole class. • With the help of ‘answers from last task, work in groups to explain factors affecting density of population in East Africa. Put the following words on the chalkboard as prompts: • climate, especially rainfall • soils • relief • diseases • type of farming • resources including minerals • urbanization. • Nominate a speaker and speakers feed group’s ideas to the whole class. • In groups, discuss problems of high population densities in rural areas e.g., shortage of land, land fragmentation, lack of fallow period • Nominate a different speaker and speakers feed group’s ideas to the whole class. • Explain and supplement group ideas where necessary. Problems of rapid population growth • hold debate or discussion on whether the rate of population growth in Uganda needs to be reduced and if so, how this can be done. Include cultural and religious issues. Rural-urban drift and urbanization • use internet to find the population of some urban areas e.g., Kampala, Nairobi in 1960, 1980, 2000, 2010, 2015 • draw line or bar graphs to show the statistics. • Using the graphs you have drawn, analyse and explain the growth of both cities. • discuss reasons for rural-urban drift: pull factors and push factors • Explain the structure of urban areas: residential, commercial, and industrial; high income, and low-income residential areas. • relate this structure to any urban area in Uganda you know. • In groups, discuss the problems related to rapid growth of urban areas. Feedback to whole class and explain your views using examples from any urban area you know. Solving the problems of big cities • Discuss, using examples of Kampala or other East African city all the above problems and suggest possible solutions. • Work in groups to create a model city of the future and explain its features.
