Theme ***Population, Urbanisation and Trade in East Africa; and Trade between East Africa and other parts of the World*** "@OMD". TOPIC 17 ***TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATION IN EAST AFRICA*** "16 PERIODS". Competency; The learner appreciates the major types of transport and communication in East Africa, factors influencing their development and the role of transport and communication in development. Learning Outcomes; The learner should be able to; a) know the difference between transport and communication (k); b) use photographs to identify the different types/modes of transport (s); c) use maps to show the major transport routes in East Africa(s); d) understand the factors which influence the distribution of the major transport routes in Uganda and the rest of East Africa (u); e) understand the role of the different types of transport in development (u); f) understand the advantages and disadvantages of each form of communication (u); g) understand the consequences of the revolution in communication caused by digital communication: mobile phones, computers and Internet, social media (u); h) appreciate the importance of transport in national and regional development (v, a, gs). Types of transport • How did people use to move and transport goods traditionally. • What sort of people still use human or animal means of transport and why? • Working in pairs, list the problems caused to transport by relief and drainage features in East Africa. • construct a table to show the advantages and disadvantages of the different types of transport (human, animal, road, railway, water, air) in terms of speed, cost, and ability to carry goods including bulk goods. • Discuss the table you have drawn to compare all forms of transport. • draw a paper or digital map showing the main railways, important road routes and shipping routes in East Africa. Draw and use maps to investigate proposed routes for exporting oil from east Africa and give your views. • Discuss how the development of transport is affected by economic development and production of goods, population, capital and markets. • discuss how the development of transport e.g., roads and railways, affects economic development. • Explain the transportation of oil by pipeline and suggest the advantages and disadvantages of different routes to transport oil from Uganda. • Working in pairs, talk about the different types of transport in your local area and how they have benefited the local community. Identify how transport and communication might be improved. • Feed your ideas back to the class and the discussion broadens. Types of communication • What are the main traditional forms of communication, the extent to which these forms are still used and the advantages they have. • Describe the means you use to communicate with people close to you and far away. Draw a table choosing your own criteria to compare and contrast the means of communication you have described. • Explore the main forms of communication that were used before the development of digital communication by mobile phone and Internet (letters, post office, fixed line telephones and telegraph). • describe the advantages of digital communication by mobile phone and internet, including social media. • Explain some of the disadvantages and dangers of communication by mobile phone, internet and social media.
