Theme ***Population, Urbanisation and Trade in East Africa; and Trade between East Africa and other Parts of the World*** "@OMD". TOPIC 18 ***TRADE WITHIN AND OUTSIDE EAST AFRICA*** "18 PERIODS". Competency; The learner knows the types of trade carried out within East Africa and between East Africa and Africa and the rest of the world and the importance and difficulties of each type of trade. Learning Outcomes; The learner should be able to; a) use field work to study a local market/shopping centre to identify the patterns of trade (s); b) know the main exports of Uganda and their contributions to intraregional and international trade (u); c) know the main exports and imports of East African countries, their destination and origins (k); d) understand the importance of trade in the development of a country (u); e) know the types of trade including barter, visible trade, and invisible trade (k); f) understand the meaning and importance of a favourable balance of trade and difficulties of an unfavourable balance of trade (u); g) understand the historical problems that affect trade in East Africa (u); h) understand the ways of overcoming the problems that affect trade in East Africa (u); i) understand why there is limited trade between East African countries (u); j) understand ways of encouraging trade between East African countries and with other African countries (u); k) use flow charts, statistics and maps to show trade patterns (s); l) appreciate the advantages of processing products to add value to exports (v, a, gs); m) appreciate the advantages of developing import substitution industries (v, a, gs); n) appreciate the need for an economic system which helps to distribute the resources in an equitable way (v, a, gs). Types of trade in East Africa • In groups, go and study a local market, using questionnaires and other methods. Find out the goods sold, the sources of the goods, who the buyers are, how the prices are set, how the goods in the market change in different seasons and the problems the traders face. • Individually think of your home area or any area of Uganda you know well. List the main goods sold from that area. Find answers to the following questions: • Which of the goods from the area are sold within Uganda and which ones are exported? • Which are the main goods the local people buy? • Which goods come from Uganda and which ones are imported from overseas? • Do you think the volume of the goods from the area which are exported overseas is more or less than the volume of goods imported? • If more goods are imported than exported, what difficulty might this cause? • Provide a table or find out on the Internet, statistics of the imports and exports of Uganda or any other country of East Africa. Using the statistics, answer the following questions: • Are most goods exported raw materials or manufactured goods? • What about most goods imported? • What kind of goods is usually more expensive? • How could we increase the value of the goods we export? Give examples of what we could do. • Through questioning, find out the dangers of importing more goods and services than we export; including the idea of unfavourable balance of payments. • How can we get foreign money/foreign exchange for buying goods from overseas if we do not export goods and services? • discuss this in groups and then have whole-class feedback. • Explain that East Africa mainly exports raw materials and imports manufactured goods. This is a product of history. Suggest how the history of East Africa led to this. In feedback, explain how this came about and how it affects the East African countries. • As a class, discuss the advantages of processing our raw materials to get more money e.g., export processed coffee in tins, cotton made into thread or cloth, milk processed into powdered milk and packed in tins, or fruits made into juice. • Explain that people can also make money without exporting, by selling goods to people in Uganda. Give examples of goods sold within East Africa, and agricultural goods which can be processed for local sale. Trade within East Africa • Use statistics on trade between East African countries or find these from Internet. • What happens if you take goods across the border to Kenya or Tanzania or export goods to other African countries? What do you have to pay? (You have to pay customs duty to the government in the other country). • Suggest why there is limited trade between East African countries. • Explain that one way to increase trade in East Africa is to abolish custom duties, but then the governments get less money. Trade Agreements • Ask what happens when you move goods from one country to another (payment of customs duty). Does this happen within East Africa? • Explain that some groups of countries sign agreements to allow free trade, without paying customs duties. The East African Community is doing this between East African countries and is also signing agreements with other groups such as the Southern African Development Community (SADC) for free trade over large areas of Africa. • Explain that some overseas groups also want to sign agreements with us e.g., European Union or USA. But sometimes they want to allow our goods into their area duty free and we allow their goods into East Africa duty free. • Think of the problems if we allow their manufactured goods duty free. How will we develop our own manufacturing industries? Invisible exports: labour and tourism • Why do some people from Uganda like to go and work overseas? • How do they benefit from this and how does the country benefit from it. • Explain that when they send foreign money back to Uganda this is called an invisible export. • Explain that there are other ways we can make overseas money without exporting anything e.g., tourism. How do we get overseas money from tourists - Tourists come and spend their money in East Africa and we do not export anything. These are also called invisible exports.
