Josephine said that carbon is often referred to as the "backbone of life" due to its central role in the chemistry of living organisms. That it is the fundamental building block of organic molecules, which are essential for life. In living organisms, carbon is found in the four major classes of biomolecules i.e., proteins, carbohydrates, lipids, and nucleic acids. Could there be a false statement?;
Biomolecules contain carbon as the basic frame work, to which other elements like hydrogen, nitrogen and chlorine are attached. These biomolecules are involved in essential biological processes such as metabolism, growth, reproduction, and genetic inheritance. Blowing exhaled breath into limewater through a tube will turn the clear solution milky. Exhaled air contains carbondioxide, one of the main products of respiration. Could there be a false statement?;
Organic chemistry is the study of carbon compounds other than oxides of carbon, carbonates, hydrogen carbonates and carbides. Carbon can form a very long chain of carbon atoms which can be up to 2000 atoms. These compounds consisting of chains of carbon atoms are called aliphatic compounds. They can be saturated with multiple covalent bonds or unsaturated with single covalent bonds. Is this all true?; 
Carbon can form a ring of carbon atoms. The compounds that form rings of carbon atoms are alicyclic compounds. These compounds can also be saturated e.g., cyclohexane or unsaturated e.g., benzene. Because of these two unique behaviours, carbon can form very many and complex compounds which has made it necessary for its study under a separate branch called organic chemistry. Is this all true?;
A hydrocarbon is a compound which contains carbon and hydrogen only. Other groups of organic compounds include: alcohols, esters, carboxylic acids, amines, ketones, and ethers. These other groups are differentiated from each other by functional groups. Functional groups are groups of atoms within a molecule that are responsible for the molecule's characteristic chemical behavior. Could there be a false statement?;
Examples of functional groups include: -OH for alcohols e.g., ethanol/CH₃OH, methanol/CH₃CH₂OH, -COOH for carboxylic acids e.g., Ethanoic acid/CH₃COOH, methanoic acid/HCOOH, -NH₂ for amines e.g., amino ethane/CH₃CH₂NH₂ and amino propane/CH₃CH₂CH₂NH₂. Could there be a false statement?;
Organic compounds are divided into groups or families of compounds with similar properties. A homologous series is a series of organic compounds related to each other by the same functional group in which each member differs from the next by the presence of an additional -CH₂ group. Each member is called a homologue. Could there be a false statement?;
Usually, all the compounds in any one homologous series can be prepared by similar general methods, can be represented by a general formula e.g., alkanes, CₙH₂ₙ₊₂, alkenes, CₙH₂ₙ, alkynes, CₙH₂ₙ₋₂, and have similar chemical properties though varying in vigour/speed as they share the same functional group. Is this all true?; 
Usually, all the compounds in any one homologous series show a gradual change of physical properties with increase in molecular mass. E.g., boiling point, melting point and density decrease with increase in molecular mass. There is a gradual change in state down the group e.g., methane is a gas, pentane is a liquid and decane is a solid. Solubility generally increases down the group as molecular mass increases. Is this all true?; 
Alkanes are saturated hydrocarbons in which carbon atoms are bonded to others by single covalent bonds. Each carbon atom is bonded to four other atoms. They have a general formula, CₙH₂ₙ₊₂, where ₙ is the number of carbon atoms. Alkanes are normally very unstable compounds and are known as paraffins. Paraffin means 'little affinity to react'. Could there be a false statement?;
According to IUPAC, International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry, all members of alkanes have their names ending with the suffix –ane. The first four alkanes have special names and Alkanes with five carbon atoms onwards are named after polygons with the same number of sides as the carbon atoms in the alkane. Straight-chain alkanes, where all carbon atoms are bonded in a continuous chain, are denoted by the prefix "n-" before the alkane name e.g., CH₃CH₂CH₃, n-butane. This prefix is used to differentiate them from branched alkanes with side chains. Is this all true?;
Molecular formula shows the number of each kind of atoms present in one molecule of a compound. Is it true that it does not show the arrangement of atoms in the molecule?; 
Structural/graphical formula shows the arrangement of atoms in one molecule of a compound. Is it true that alkanes like other hydrocarbons and other organic compounds have ionic bonds between the atoms?;
In alkanes, the carbon atoms use all the four outer most electrons to form covalent bonds by sharing with other carbon atoms and hydrogen atoms. Because all the electrons are used up in the formation of covalent bonds, they are called saturated hydrocarbons. Is this all true?;
Isomerism is the existence of a compound with the same molecular formula but different structural formulae. Isomers are compounds with the same molecular formula but different structural formula. They could belong to different homologous series. They usually share the same chemical properties but differ in physical properties. Could there be a false statement?;
All hydrocarbons with four or more carbon atoms per molecule possess isomers. The greater the number of carbon atoms, the greater the number of possible isomers. E.g., butane. In branched chains, the branch may be a hydrocarbon or other atoms like chlorine, and bromine. The hydrocarbon side chains have one hydrogen more than the parent alkanes and are generally referred to as alkyl groups. Could there be a false statement?;
Alkanes are insoluble in water but soluble in non-polar solvents and are less dense than water. Their densities rise gradually with increasing molecular mas. Moving down the series, the molecular size of the alkanes increases. The first four members are gases, the next 12 members, are liquids, the rest are waxy solids at room temperature. Could there be a false statement?;
Methane is a colourless, odourless gas. It is only slightly soluble in water, has no effect on litmus, is less dense than air, is an unstable compound and generally does not react with acids and alkalis under normal conditions. Could there be a false statement?;
Alkanes are generally inert and do not react with chemical reagents under ordinary conditions as C–C and C–H bonds are not easily broken. They commonly undergo combustion and substitution reactions. Could there be a false statement?; 
In a plentiful supply of oxygen, alkanes burn to form carbon dioxide and water only, with liberation of much heat. In a limited supply of oxygen, alkanes burn to form carbon monoxide, and sometimes soot and water, with liberation of less heat compared to that from complete combustion. Could that be right?;
The combustion of alkanes produces considerable amount of heat. This explains why they are used as fuel for domestic and industrial uses. For example, butane is used in cigarette lighters, methane in gas appliances and butane found in petrol is used to run petrol engines. Could there be a wrong statement?; 
The incomplete combustion of carbon that results into release of poisonous carbon monoxide and sometimes even carbon, occurs in cylinders of petrol engines. It is therefore dangerous to run a car engine in a garage where there is no free air circulation. Could that be true?;
Methane reacts slowly with chlorine at room temperature. However, the reaction becomes much faster and even explosive in bright sunlight. This is because ultraviolet light provides the energy to break the chlorine molecule into chlorine radicals. These radicals then react with methane to initiate a series of substitutions, replacing hydrogen atoms with chlorine atoms. Chloromethane is one product formed in this reaction. Could this be false?;
Natural gas and petroleum are the two main sources of alkanes. Natural gas contains mainly methane gas which usually accompanies petroleum deposits with small amounts of other gases like propane and butane. It is found in different parts of the world, below the earth's surface usually near oil deposits. Could this be true?;
Natural gas primarily originates from the thermal decomposition of organic matter, particularly kerogen, under high temperatures and appropriate depths within underground formations. These geological conditions favour the generation of gaseous hydrocarbons compared to liquid hydrocarbons like petroleum. While natural gas often accompanies petroleum deposits due to their shared origin, natural gas reservoirs independent of oil can also exist. Could this be mostly false?;
Methane, the largest component of natural gas, is formed by anaerobic decomposition of organic matter and it is found in swamps, stagnant ponds and marshes. Natural gas is nonpoisonous and has no smell. For safety reasons, a distinctive odourant, typically mercaptan, is commonly added to natural gas, to aid in leak detection, a precaution that ensures the safe transportation of natural gas through pipelines. It is stored as compressed natural gas under high pressure. It is a less polluting and less expensive fossil fuel. Could this be all true?;
Natural gas is used as a source of heat energy and for cooking. It is used as a fuel for vehicles in form of compressed natural gas. It is used as an input for producing plastics and other chemicals. It is used to produce electricity. It is also used in air conditioning. Could there be a false statement?;
Biogas is formed by the anaerobic action of bacteria on cellulose and other organic matter. It contains 65%-75% methane, along with other gases such as carbon dioxide, ammonia and hydrogen sulphide. The major source of biogas is animal wastes and to some extent plant wastes. Could all this be true?;
The quality of biogas produced can vary depending on the type of waste used. For example, mixtures containing cow dung, human excreta, and plant residues like bean stalks can yield biogas with relatively favourable characteristics. Could something be wrong with these two statements?; 
A simple biogas generator consists of a container in which animal wastes or plants are mixed with a limited amount of water and then covered to exclude aerial oxidation. At temperatures of 25⁰C-30⁰C, the anaerobic bacteria present decompose the wastes to form biogas. Biogas is used mainly for cooking and lighting purposes. Could all this be true?; 
Biogas is cheap to produce. The solid bi-product from a biogas plant is used as an organic fertilizer since it contains high nitrogen content. Sewage materials can be converted to biogas. Forests and wild life would be conserved if institutions and rural communities used biogas instead of wood and charcoal for their fuel needs. Could one of these 4 advantages of biogas production be wrong?;
Some of the gases contained in biogas are air pollutants. Sulphur dioxide formed when biogas is burnt leads to formation of acid rain which results in damage to plants and aquatic organisms. Hydrogen sulphide contained in biogas tarnishes silver objects due to formation of black Ag₂S and discolours paints which contain lead compounds due to formation of black PbS. Hydrogen sulphide and ammonia contained in biogas cause irritation of eyes. Could all these 4 disadvantages of biogas production be right?;
Petroleum/Crude oil is primarily formed by anaerobic decomposition of ancient photosynthetic organisms. It contains a wide range of alkanes, ranging from molecular gases to high molecular waxy solids. The oil deposits are usually found with sand and brine, and some of the constituents of the deposits contain elements such as oxygen, sulphur and nitrogen. Could there be atleast 2 wrong statements?;
Petroleum, a mixture of hydrocarbons, undergoes fractional distillation to separate it into various useful fractions based on the differing boiling points of its components. Lighter fractions with lower boiling points, thus more volatile, are collected at higher levels of the tower. Heavier fractions with higher boiling points, thus less volatile, are collected at lower levels of the tower. Could all the 3 statements be right?;
As smaller fractions can be used as fuel and chemical feedstock, the demand for smaller fractions is generally higher than that of larger fractions such as bitumen. Alisha says that to meet these demands, larger fractions are cracked to form smaller hydrocarbon molecules. Could she be wrong?;
Cracking is important as it converts larger fractions of petroleum, which are of lower demand, into small hydrocarbons which are in high demand, and in addition, cracking provides the source of hydrogen for the production of ammonia in the Haber process. Could this be true?; 
Fractional distillation of crude oil only yields 20% of the petrol. More petrol is produced by the cracking process. Cracking is breaking down the large molecules of oils into smaller molecules of petrol and gases, by use of heat or catalyst. The gases are usually a mixture of small alkanes, useful alkenes, and hydrogen is sometimes produced as well. Could this be false?; 
Irene says that in thermal cracking, gas oil can be heated to around 500°C under high pressure, allowing it to remain in the liquid phase. This liquid product is then fractionated to obtain various fractions, including petrol. Is that right?;
Harriet says that in steam cracking, oil or natural gas are heated to temperatures around 800°C to 900°C in the presence of steam. That the heating duration typically ranges from seconds to minutes, based on process conditions and desired outcomes. That the process gives a variety of hydrocarbon products such as petrol, fuel oil, alkenes, and hydrogen gas. Is that false?;
Elizabeth says that catalytic cracking commonly utilizes zeolite-based catalysts, with Al₂O₃ and SiO₂ also considered as possible catalysts. That the process typically occurs at relatively lower temperatures and pressures. And that it is known for producing high-quality petrol. Is that true?;
Alkanes are used as fuels e.g., natural gas and coal gas. Methane when heated to 1000°C decomposes to form hydrogen and carbon black/lamp black which is used to make printer’s ink, paints and carbon papers. Bottled gas, which is liquefied propane and butane, is used for welding. Could one of the uses of alkanes be false?;
Alkenes are unsaturated hydrocarbons which contain a double bond between two carbon atoms in the molecule. They have a general formula CₙH₂ₙ where ₙ=2 or more. A 1-carbon alkene cannot exist. Is this all true?;
Mary says that ethene can be obtained from either the dehydration of ethanol by excess hot concentrated sulphuric acid or from the catalytic dehydration of ethanol. Could she be wrong?;
Ethene is obtained from the dehydration of ethanol by excess hot concentrated sulphuric acid. The mixture is heated on a sand bath until the thermometer reading is about 180⁰C. Ethene is evolved and passed through a wash bottle containing concentrated potassium hydroxide solution to remove sulphur dioxide. The alkali also removes fumes of the acid. Ethene is collected over water since it is slightly insoluble in water. Sometimes, aluminium sulphate is added to the reaction to reduce frothing. Is this all true?;
Ethene can also be obtained from the catalytic dehydration of ethanol. Ethanol soaked in glass wool is heated strongly. It vaporizes and its vapour is passed over heated Al₂O₃. Ethene is obtained and collected over water. Could there be a false statement?;
Ethene is a colourless and non-poisonous gas. It has a faint sweet smell. It’s slightly soluble in water but soluble in organic solvents e.g., benzene and methyl benzene. It is slightly less dense than air. It’s neutral to litmus. Are all these physical properties of ethene, right?;
The first 3 members of the alkene series are gases, alkenes with 5-15 carbon atoms are liquids and the higher alkenes are solids. Alkenes are generally insoluble in water but soluble in organic solvents like ethanol. They have a characteristic smell and burn with a luminous flame. They are typically more volatile than alkanes, leading to lower boiling and melting points compared to corresponding alkanes, with higher densities. Could there be a false statement?;
Alkenes are generally less reactive than corresponding alkanes. Like alkanes, they undergo complete combustion when there is sufficient oxygen to form carbon dioxide and water only. They undergo incomplete combustion to produce soot and carbon monoxide. Due to the higher carbon-to-hydrogen ratio, alkenes burn with a smokier flame than their corresponding alkanes. Ethene burns in air with a clean, blue flame. Could there be a false statement?;
Ethene and other unsaturated compounds undergo addition reactions. An addition reaction is one in which a molecule adds to an unsaturated compound by breaking the double bond or triple bond. Halogens can be added across the C = C bond at room temperature and pressure to produce halogenoalkanes. Is this entirely false?;
When ethene is bubbled through liquid bromine in a test tube, the reddish–brown bromine turns to a colourless, oily liquid i.e., bromine water is decolorized or the red brown color of bromine is discharged. This is the common test for unsaturation in the laboratory. Is this entirely true?;
When ethene is bubbled through bromine water in a test tube, the red colour disappears due to the reaction between ethene and bromine molecules/Br₂ in the solution. Although bromine water is an aqueous solution of hydrobromic acid/HBr and hypobromous acid/HOBr, Br₂ is the primary reactant. Ethene reacts with Br₂ to form 1,2-dibromoethane. Is there a false statement?;
Is it true that when chlorine gas is mixed with ethane and the mixture left in sunlight, the two combine forming a colorless oily liquid called 1,2-dichloroethane?;
When ethene is bubbled through acidified potassium permanganate in a test tube, the purple potassium permanganate turns colourless. Jane says that this could serve as a test for unsaturation. Could she be wrong?;
When a mixture of hydrogen gas and ethene gas is passed over a finely divided nickel catalyst at around 200°C, ethane is formed. Platinum, capable of operating at much lower temperatures, even at room temperature, can also serve as a catalyst for this reaction. The hydrogenation reaction is employed in the hardening of liquid vegetable oils into solid fats. Is this all true?;
Margarine is often produced by partially hydrogenating vegetable oils. Vegetable oils are typically polyunsaturated, containing multiple double bonds in their fatty acid chains. During partial hydrogenation, some, but not all, of these C=C bonds are broken by adding hydrogen molecules across them. This reduces the number of double bonds and makes the oil more solid at room temperature. Could this be false?;
Alcohols can be produced from the addition of steam to alkenes. Is it true that this takes place at a temperature of 300°C and a pressure of 60atm, in the presence of phosphoric acid, which acts as a catalyst?;
When ethene comes into contact with fuming sulphuric acid, a powerful electron acceptor, it undergoes an addition reaction to form ethyl hydrogen sulphate, an oily liquid, which can be further converted into ethanol by heating it with water. The hydrolysis step breaks apart the ethyl hydrogen sulphate molecule, releasing ethanol and regenerating the sulphuric acid. In this way, the sulphuric acid acts as a catalyst for the overall conversion of ethene to ethanol. Could this be false?;
Alkene molecules can undergo addition polymerization, linking together to form large, saturated molecules called polymers. Is it true that this process typically requires high temperatures and/or pressures, often in the presence of a specialized catalyst?;
Ethene can be efficiently polymerized to form polyethene, a white, waxy solid plastic. This reaction occurs at a high temperature, around 200°C and pressure, using a catalyst like a free radical initiator or a Ziegler-Natta catalyst. While oxygen technically has the potential to initiate polymerization, it's generally not the preferred catalyst, due to its inefficiency and potential negative effects on the polymer chain length. Could this be false?;
Ethene is a versatile starting material in many industrial processes. It's a major building block for various plastics, including the widely used polythene. It also plays a role in the commercial ripening of fruits like bananas, acting as a plant hormone that triggers the ripening process. While less common, ethene can be converted into ethanol through chemical reactions. It can also be used in the production of some refrigerants and antifreeze agents. Could all this be true?;
Propene is a key precursor for polypropylene, a widely used plastic with applications in textiles, packaging, and various moulded products. Propene is also used in the production of some synthetic rubbers and acrylic fibres. Could it be only one of the two statements that is true?;
Alkynes are unsaturated hydrocarbons containing one triple bond between two carbon atoms in their molecule. They have the general formula CₙH₂ₙ₋₂, where ₙ ≥ 2. Alkynes are named following the alkane naming convention, but with the suffix "-ane" replaced by "-yne". The name is based on the number of carbon atoms in the alkyne chain itself. The formula for ethyne, the simplest alkyne, is C₃H₄. Could there be a false statement?;
Calcium carbide can be used in the laboratory to prepare ethyne gas. In this process, calcium carbide crystals are placed in a flask, sometimes with sand for support. Cold water is then added dropwise to the calcium carbide. Ethyne gas, which is colourless and less dense than air, is produced along with calcium hydroxide. The ethyne gas can then be collected by upward delivery since it is less dense than air or over water since it is slightly soluble in it. Could there be a false statement?;
Alcohols/Alkanols are a homologous series of organic compounds which contain a hydroxyl group, -OH, joined to the hydrocarbon molecule. They have a general formula, CₙH₂ₙ₊₁OH. They are named after corresponding alkanes by replacing the –e of the suffix -ane in alkanes with -ol. Is this all true?;
Alcohols are liquids at room temperature and pressure and are very volatile. As the molecular sizes of the alcohols increases down the series, the forces of attraction between the molecules become stronger. As a result, the melting and boiling points increase with larger molecular size. Smaller alcohols are miscible in water. As the molecular size of the alcohols increases, solubility in water decreases. Could there be a completely false statement?;
Is it true that ethanol, used in food and drinks, as a solvent for paints and perfumes, and as a fuel, is a common alkanol?;
Ethanol is a colourless, mobile, hydroscopic liquid. It has a pleasant smell and a burning taste. It is a volatile liquid and boils at 78˚C. It has a density of around 0.8g/cm³ and mixes with water in any proportion. Could this be inaccurate?;
Alcohols undergo complete combustion when there's sufficient oxygen, producing carbon dioxide and water. Heating them with oxidizing agents like acidified potassium permanganate can cause oxidation. The resulting product, aldehyde or carboxylic acid, depends on the type of alcohol and reaction conditions. Ethanol, for example, burns completely in air with a slightly bluish flame to form carbon dioxide and water. Is that all true?;
Ethanol is prepared by the process of fermentation of carbohydrates such as starch and sugars. Fermentation is a process in which carbohydrates like starch and sugars are converted to alcohol by enzymes. The enzymatic break down of glucose yields simple compounds like ethanol and carbon dioxide. Some heat is as well generated. Fermentation is an aerobic process. Is that all true?;
Cassava is crushed and heated in steam under pressure to extract starch, which is heated with malt at a temperature of 60˚C for about an hour. Yeast is added at 37°C, in the absence of oxygen to the mixture and left to ferment for 2-3 days. This produces a very concentrated solution of ethanol. could there be any false statement?;
Jane says that fractional distillation serves as a vital step in the production of fermented liquors, facilitating the separation of alcohol from other components of the wash and resulting in a more concentrated and flavorful final product. Could she be wrong?;
Polymers are a special type of macromolecules made of repeating subunits of the same compound. Fibres are polymers which can be drawn into threads. All synthetic polymers are plastic in nature and hence plastics. Plastics can be put into two types depending on their behaviour upon heating i.e., thermo-softening plastics and thermo-setting plastics. Could all this be true?;
Crude ethanol, locally known as “tonto”, is mainly from bananas. An alcoholic drink, locally known as “marwa” is mainly from millet. Beer is made by the fermentation of the starch in barley and wine by the fermentation of sugars in grapes. Spirits are obtained by distillation of dilute solutions produced by fermentation and therefore have a decreased alcoholic content. Is this all true?;  
Ethanol is used in the manufacture of perfumes, flavours, drugs and varnishes. It is used in thermometers measuring low temperatures. It is added to petrol and used as fuel. It is used in the manufacture of aftershaves and moisturising creams. It is used as a preservative and for sterilization. It is used in the making of alcoholic beverages e.g., beers, wines and spirits. It is used as a solvent for paints, varnishes, etc. Are all these true?; 
Carboxylic acids are a fundamental group of organic acids characterized by the presence of a carboxyl functional group. These acids also have a general formula for the entire molecule as CₙH₂ₙ₊₁COOH, where ₙ ≥ 1. Their names typically end in "oic acid". Acetic acid found in vinegar, citric acid present in citrus fruits like lemons, and vitamin C are all carboxylic acids. Could there be a wrong statement?;
Carboxylic acids are weak acids that partially dissociate in water to give hydrogen ions, thus, they undergo reactions of acids. They react with metals that are positioned above hydrogen in the reactivity series to produce a salt and hydrogen. They react with metal carbonates to produce a salt, carbon dioxide and water. They react with metal hydroxides to produce a salt and water. Are all these true?; 
Carboxylic acids react with alcohols to produce an ester and water. Esters are sweet-smelling liquids that are used for making soap. High esters such as wax can be used for making candles. They occur naturally in plants and can be produced through esterification from the reaction between alcohols and carboxylic acids. Could there be a false statement?;
Esters have a formula RCOOR¹, where R and R¹ are alkyl groups. Esterification requires heating an alcohol and a carboxylic acid with a few drops of concentrated sulphuric acid as a catalyst. This process is a reversible reaction. Apart from acting as a catalyst in the reaction, concentrated sulphuric acid is a dehydrating agent and removes the water produced. This also helps speeding up the rate of product formation. Is this all true?; 
Adam insists that there are two parts to the name of an ester. That the first part of the name is taken from the alcohol, while the second part is taken from the carboxylic acid from which it is made. Isn't that wrong?;
Soap is a type of cleaning agent made from the sodium or potassium salts of long-chain carboxylic acids, such as stearic acid. Common examples of soap molecules include sodium stearate, C₁₇H₃₅COONa and potassium stearate, C₁₇H₃₅COOK. Could this be true?;
The process of making soap using an alkali and an ester, fat/oil, is known as saponification. NaOH often provides harder, more durable soaps while KOH is often used to produce soft bars or liquid soaps that are mainly used as toilet soaps. However, both NaOH and KOH can produce hard, soft, or liquid soaps depending on the chosen fat/oil. There isn't a strict rule that NaOH guarantees harder soaps and KOH, softer ones. Could there be just one true statement?;
To make soap, Amelia boiled vegetable oil with concentrated sodium hydroxide solution until a uniform solution was obtained. She allowed the solution to cool. Concentrated solution of sodium chloride/brine was added to precipitate the soap which floated on the surface. She said that the process of precipitating the soap is known as ―salting out. Is Amelia all right?;
Soap emulsifies oil/grease into tiny droplets/micelles in water. The polar end of soap/hydrophilic head dissolves in water and soap ions surround fat droplets. The non polar end of soap/hydrophobic tail dissolves in oil/grease that holds dirt on fabric. Agitation causes emulsification of oil/grease and then the dirty tiny droplets are released into a suspension and rinsed away by clean water. Could there be a false statement?;
Soap forms scum with hard water and a lot of it has to be used to produce sufficient lather for washing. Additionally, its higher pH can irritate skin and damage fabrics over time. Compared to detergents, soap offers less versatility in cleaning different types of dirt and may not work as well in cold water. Is this all true?;
A detergent is any substance that facilitates the emulsification and removal of oil/grease. This means that soap is also a detergent although the name is used for other substitutes of soap like Omo, Nomi, Ariel, Toss, etc. The synthetic detergents function in the same way as soap but they are more soluble than soap and therefore clean more effectively. Could there be a false statement?;
Soapless detergents are made from concentrated sulphuric acid and hydrocarbons obtained from petrol refining. Some detergents contain phosphates to prevent scum formation. Sodium perborate is often added to washing powders to give them a mild bleaching action. Sodium sulphate and silicate are added to keep the powder dry and free flowing. Some powders also contain enzymes to digest organic dirt like food stains and blood. Could all this be true?;
Sucrose, the ordinary sugar we eat every day is an organic molecule. Sucrose is a disaccharide, composed of two monosaccharide units, glucose and fructose, joined together by a glycosidic bond. Specifically, one molecule of glucose combines with 2 molecules of fructose to form sucrose. Could all this be true?;