Theme ***Carbon in Life*** "@OMD". TOPIC 9 ***CARBON IN LIFE*** “30 PERIODS”. Competency; The learner appreciates the diversity of organic carbon compounds including the alkanes, alkenes, alcohols, and fatty acids. Learning Outcomes; The learner should be able to; a) Recognise that there is a diversity of carbon compounds in living things and materials derived from living things, and that these may be classified into groups (u, s); b) Understand that crude oil is a mixture of different alkanes which can be separated by fractional distillation; that these products are used in fuels and to make other useful products (k, u); c) Know and appreciate that natural gas deposits are found worldwide, that their main constituent is methane and that gas deposits are useful source of fuels and chemical feedstock (k, u); d) Appreciate that biogas is a carbon-based fuel useful for cooking and lighting (u, s); e) Know some common synthetic and natural polymers and how their properties relate to their uses (u, s); f) Understand and appreciate that alcohols form a group of compounds of which ethanol is a typical member and has many uses (u, s); g) Understand how ethanol is made naturally by fermentation of sugars and other organic substances, and be aware of the dangers of abuse of ethanol (u, s); h) Know the process of making soapy detergents from natural fats and oils and appreciate that soaps are effective in removing oily stains (u, s); i) Know that soapless detergents are made from crude oil and that soapless detergents are better cleaning agents in hard water than the soapy detergents but have a more deleterious effect on the environment (k, u, s); j) Understand how organic compounds can be grouped into homologous series, each of which has similarities in structure and properties (k, u). [Assignment 1] {Classify a diversity of carbon compounds in living things and materials derived from living things, into groups}. Carbon is often referred to as the "backbone of life" due to its central role in the chemistry of living organisms. It is the fundamental building block of organic molecules, which are essential for life. In living organisms, carbon is found in the four major classes of biomolecules (proteins, carbohydrates, lipids, and nucleic acids). These organic compounds contain carbon as the basic frame work, to which other elements like hydrogen, nitrogen and chlorine are attached. These biomolecules are involved in essential biological processes such as metabolism, growth, reproduction, and genetic inheritance. Blowing exhaled breath into limewater through a tube will turn the clear solution milky. Exhaled air contains carbondioxide, a by-product of respiration. Organic chemistry is the study of carbon compounds other than oxides of carbon, carbonates, hydrogen carbonates and carbides. Carbon has a unique behaviour in a chemical sense because: 1) It can form a very long chain of carbon atoms which can be up to 2000 atoms. These compounds consisting of chains of carbon atoms are called aliphatic compounds. They can be saturated (if all the carbon atoms are joined to each other by a single covalent bond) or unsaturated (if they contain multiple covalent bonds i.e., either double or triple). 2) It can form a ring of carbon atoms. The compounds that form rings of carbon atoms are alicyclic compounds. Figure272.3.1.carbon_in_life_image_001.jpg. These compounds can also be saturated e.g., cyclohexane. Figure273.3.1.carbon_in_life_image_002.jpg. Or unsaturated e.g., benzene. Figure274.3.1.carbon_in_life_image_003.jpg. Because of these two unique behaviours, carbon can form very many and complex compounds which has made it necessary for its study under a separate branch called organic chemistry. However, for historical and conventional reasons, some simpler compounds such as carbon dioxide (CO₂) and sodium carbonate (Na₂CO₃), are usually studied under non carbon compounds in inorganic chemistry. Video54.Why_is_All_Life_Carbon_Based_Not_Silicon.mp4. Classification of organic compounds. Organic compounds can be classified into several groups. The simplest of the organic compounds are hydrocarbons. A hydrocarbon is a compound which contains carbon and hydrogen only. Other groups include: Alcohols, esters, carboxylic acids, amines, ketones, and ethers. These other groups are differentiated from each other by functional groups. Hydrocarbons can have functional groups (like double bonds or aromatic rings) that affect their reactivity, but the simplest type (alkanes) does not. Functional groups are groups of atoms within a molecule that are responsible for the molecule's characteristic chemical behaviour. Examples of functional groups include: -OH for alcohols e.g., ethanol, CH₃CH₂OH, methanol, CH₃OH; -COOH for carboxylic acids e.g., Ethanoic acid, CH₃COOH, methanoic acid, HCOOH; And, -NH₂ for amines e.g., amino ethane, CH₃CH₂NH₂ and amino propane, CH₃CH₂CH₂NH₂. [Assignment 2] {Group organic compounds into homologous series, each of which has similarities in structure and properties}. Homologous series. Organic compounds are divided into groups or families of compounds with similar properties. A homologous series is a series of organic compounds related to each other by the same functional group in which each member differs from the next by the presence of an additional methylene (-CH₂) group. Each member is called a homologue. Characteristics of homologous series. Usually, all the compounds in any one homologous series; 1) Can be prepared by similar general methods. 2) Can be represented by a general formula e.g., alkanes, CₙH₂ₙ₊₂, alkenes, CₙH₂ₙ, alkynes, CₙH₂ₙ₋₂. 3) Have similar chemical properties (though varying in vigour/speed) as they share the same functional group. 4) Show a gradual change of physical properties with increase in molecular mass. E.g., boiling point, melting point and density increase with increase in molecular mass; there is a gradual change in state down the group (e.g., methane is a gas, pentane is a liquid and decane is a solid); solubility in polar solvents like water decreases with increasing molecular mass for non-polar homologous series. Solubility in non-polar solvents generally increases with increasing chain length. 5) Differ from the next by a –CH₂ group (methylene group). The three main homologous series of hydrocarbons are alkanes, alkenes and alkynes. They have a general formula of: Figure275.3.1.carbon_in_life_image_004.jpg. Where x and y can be any numerical whole numbers. Alkanes have only single bonds, while alkenes and alkynes contain multiple bonds (double and triple, respectively). Aromatic hydrocarbons are a separate category with a unique ring structure and electron behaviour. Alkanes, alkenes, and alkynes can all be differentiated by their bonding schemes, respectively, as in the figure below. Figure276.3.1.carbon_in_life_image_005.jpg. Video35.Homologous_Series.mp4. Naming of Organic compounds. The prefix of the name of an organic compound gives the number of carbon atoms present in the compound. Figure277.3.1.carbon_in_life_image_006.jpg. The suffix of the name of an organic compound tells us which homologous series the compound belongs to. Figure278.3.1.carbon_in_life_image_007.jpg. Alkanes. Alkanes are saturated hydrocarbons in which carbon atoms are bonded to others by single covalent bonds. Each carbon atom is bonded to four other atoms. Alkanes have a general formula, CₙH₂ₙ₊₂. Where n is the number of carbon atoms. Alkanes are normally very stable compounds and are known as paraffins. Paraffin means 'little affinity to react'. Nomenclature. According to IUPAC (International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry), all members of alkanes have their names ending with the suffix –ane. The first four alkanes have special names and Alkanes with five carbon atoms onwards are named after polygons with the same number of sides as the carbon atoms in the alkane. Figure279.3.1.carbon_in_life_image_008.jpg. Straight-chain alkanes, where all carbon atoms are bonded in a continuous chain, are denoted by the prefix "n-" before the alkane name e.g., CH₃CH₂CH₂CH₃, n-butane. This prefix is used to differentiate them from branched alkanes with side chains. Alkanes like other hydrocarbons and other organic compounds have covalent bonds between the atoms. In alkanes, the carbon atoms use all the four outer most electrons to form covalent bonds by sharing with other carbon atoms and hydrogen atoms. Because all the electrons are used up in the formation of covalent bonds, they are called saturated hydrocarbons. Figure280.3.1.carbon_in_life_image_009.jpg. Isomerism. This is the existence of a compound with the same molecular formula but different structural formulae. Molecular formula shows the number of each kind of atoms present in one molecule of a compound. It does not show the arrangement of atoms in the molecule. Structural formula (graphical formula) shows the arrangement of atoms in one molecule of a compound. Isomers are compounds with the same molecular formula but different structural formula. They could belong to different homologous series. They usually share the same chemical properties but differ in physical properties. All hydrocarbons with four or more carbon atoms per molecule possess isomers. The greater the number of carbon atoms, the greater the number of possible isomers. E.g., butane. Figure281.3.1.carbon_in_life_image_010.jpg. In branched chains, the branch may be a hydrocarbon or other atoms like chlorine, and bromine. The hydrocarbon side chains have one hydrogen less than the parent alkanes and are generally referred to as alkyl groups. The alkyl groups derive their names from respective parent alkanes e.g., -CH₃ (methyl); -CH₂CH₃ (ethyl); -CH₂CH₂CH₃ (propyl); - CH₂CH₂CH₂CH₃ (butyl). For branched alkanes e.g. Figure282.3.1.carbon_in_life_image_011.jpg. i) Name the longest unbranched carbon chain i.e., the longest carbon chain consists of 5 carbon atoms, it is therefore a derivative of pentane ii) Give the number showing the position of the branch. Count from the side that will give the branch the lowest possible number. E.g., the branch is on the second carbon atom (the branch replaces hydrogen on the second carbon). Figure283.3.1.carbon_in_life_image_012.jpg. iii) Name the branch (substituent group) i.e., methyl group. So, write the name of the alkane starting with the carbon position on which the branch is located (2); put a dash (-); write the name of the branch/substituent group (methyl) followed by the name of the longest straight carbon chain. The above compound is therefore 2-methyl pentane. vi) If the branches of side chains are more than one and are similar, di, tri, etc., are used. Figure284.3.1.carbon_in_life_image_013.jpg. vii) If the side chains are different, naming follows alphabetical order. Figure285.3.1.carbon_in_life_image_014.jpg. Physical properties of alkanes. Alkanes are insoluble in water but soluble in non-polar solvents and are less dense than water. Their densities rise gradually with increasing molecular mass. Moving down the series, the molecular size of the alkanes increases. This means that the intermolecular forces of attraction become stronger. The first four members are gases, the next 12 members (C₅–C₁₆), are liquids, the rest are waxy solids at room temperature. This leads to an increase in melting and boiling points and an increase in viscosity down the series. The flammability, however, decreases with an increase in molecular size of the alkanes. Chemical properties of alkanes. Alkanes are generally inert and do not react with chemical reagents under ordinary conditions as C–C and C–H bonds are not easily broken. They commonly undergo combustion and substitution reactions. Combustion: In a plentiful supply of oxygen, alkanes burn to form carbon dioxide and water only, with liberation of much heat. CₙH₂ₙ₊₂(g) + (2n + 1)O₂(g) → nCO₂(g) + (n + 1)H₂O(g/l) + heat. CH₄(g) + 2O₂(g) → CO₂(g) + 2H₂O(g) + Heat. In a limited supply of oxygen, alkanes burn to form carbon monoxide, and sometimes soot (carbon) and water, with liberation of less heat compared to that liberated from their complete combustion. CₙH₂ₙ₊₂(g) + Limited O₂(g) → CO(g) + H₂O(l) + C(s) + heat (less than complete combustion). 2CH₄(g) + 3O₂(g) → 2CO(g) + 4H₂O(g) + Heat. 2CH₄(g) + 3O₂(g) → C(s) + 2H₂O(g) + Heat. The combustion of alkanes produces considerable amount of heat. This explains why they are used as fuel for domestic and industrial uses. For example, butane is used in cigarette lighters, methane in gas appliances and butane found in petrol is used to run petrol engines. The incomplete combustion of carbon that results into release of poisonous carbon monoxide and sometimes even carbon, occurs in cylinders of petrol engines. It is therefore dangerous to run a car engine in a garage where there is no free air circulation. Reaction with chlorine (Chlorination). Generally, alkanes undergo substitution reactions with halogens. A substitution reaction is reaction in which an atom or a group of atoms in a compound is/are replaced by other atoms. For the case of alkanes, this is commonly possible with halogens. Methane reacts slowly with chlorine at room temperature. However, the reaction becomes much faster and even explosive in bright sunlight. This is because ultraviolet (UV) light provides the energy to break the chlorine molecule (Cl₂) into chlorine radicals (Cl∙). These radicals then react with methane (CH₄) to initiate a series of substitutions, replacing hydrogen atoms with chlorine atoms. Chloromethane (CH₃Cl) is one of the products of this reaction. Figure287.3.1.carbon_in_life_image_016.jpg. • Individually, research the structural formulae of common homologous series (alkanes, alkenes, alcohols and carboxylic acids) and identify the functional groups responsible for their characteristic chemical properties. Sources of Alkanes. Natural gas and petroleum are the two main sources of alkanes. [Assignment 3] {What is natural gas, is it a carbon-based fuel, how is it obtained and what are its uses}. 1) Natural gas. This contains mainly methane gas which usually accompanies petroleum deposits with small amounts of other gases like propane and butane. It is found in different parts of the world, below the earth's surface, usually near oil deposits. Natural gas, primarily originates from the thermal decomposition of organic matter, particularly kerogen, under high temperatures and appropriate depths within underground formations. These geological conditions favour the generation of gaseous hydrocarbons compared to liquid hydrocarbons like petroleum. While natural gas often accompanies petroleum deposits due to their shared origin, natural gas reservoirs independent of oil can also exist. Natural gas can also form through processes like the thermal cracking of petroleum or from inorganic reactions within the Earth's crust, known as abiogenic processes. Natural gas is nonpoisonous and has no smell. For safety reasons, a distinctive odourant, typically mercaptan, is commonly added to natural gas, to aid in leak detection, a precaution that ensures the safe transportation of natural gas through pipelines. It is stored as compressed natural gas (CNG) under high pressure. It is a less polluting and less expensive fossil fuel. As of 2023, Russia boasts the world's largest estimated natural gas reserves, accounting for roughly 24.3% of the global total. Iran follows closely behind with approximately 17.3%. Uses of natural gas; It is used as a source of heat energy and for cooking; It is used as a fuel for vehicles in form of compressed natural gas; It is used as an input for producing plastics and other chemicals; It is used to produce electricity. It is also used in air conditioning. Biogas. Biogas is formed by the anaerobic action of bacteria on cellulose and other organic matter. Biogas contains (65-75)% methane, along with other gases such as carbon dioxide, ammonia and hydrogen sulphide. The major source of biogas is animal wastes and to some extent plant wastes. The quality of biogas produced can vary depending on the type of waste used; For example, mixtures containing cow dung, human excreta, and plant residues like bean stalks, can yield biogas with relatively favourable characteristics. A simple biogas generator consists of a container in which animal wastes or plants are mixed with a limited amount of water and then covered to exclude aerial oxidation. At temperatures of (25-30)⁰C, the anaerobic bacteria present decompose the wastes to form biogas. Biogas is commonly used for cooking and lighting purposes. Advantages of biogas production. (i) Biogas is cheap to produce. (ii) The solid bi-product from a biogas plant is used as an organic fertilizer since it contains high nitrogen content. (iii) Sewage materials can be converted to biogas. (iv) Forests and wild life would be conserved if institutions and rural communities used biogas instead of wood and charcoal for their fuel needs. Disadvantages of biogas production. (i) Some of the gases contained in biogas are air pollutants. (ii) Sulphur dioxide formed when biogas is burnt leads to formation of acid rain which results in damage to plants and aquatic organisms. 2H₂S(g) + 3O₂(g) → 2H₂O(g) + 2SO₂(g). (iii) Hydrogen sulphide contained in biogas tarnishes silver objects due to the formation of black silver sulphide and discolours paints which contain lead compounds due to the formation of black lead (II) sulphide. (iv) Hydrogen sulphide and ammonia contained in biogas cause irritation of eyes. Methane, the largest component of natural gas and biogas, is naturally formed by anaerobic decomposition of organic matter and it is often found in swamps, stagnant ponds and marshes. Laboratory preparation of methane. Figure286.3.1.carbon_in_life_image_015.jpg. A mixture of sodium ethanoate and soda lime is put into a hard glass tube and the mixture heated strongly. A colourless methane gas is evolved and collected over water because it’s insoluble in water or, by upward delivery since it is less dense than air. CH₃COONa(s) + NaOH(s) → Na₂CO₃(s) + CH₄(g). Physical properties of methane. Methane is a colourless, odourless gas. It is only slightly soluble in water. It has no effect on litmus. It is less dense than air. It is a stable compound and generally does not react with acids and alkalis under normal conditions. Video56.Biogas_cow_manure.mp4. Video38.How_does_a_biogas_plant_work.mp4. • Individually, research and discuss with the class, the chemical nature of biogas, how it is made and why it is described as a renewable fuel, before writing a report. [Assignment 4] {What is crude oil, how can it be separated by fractional distillation and what are the uses of the products obtained from its distillation}. 2) Petroleum (Crude oil). Petroleum is primarily formed by anaerobic decomposition of photosynthetic organisms. It contains a wide range of alkanes, ranging from molecular gases to high molecular waxy solids. The oil deposits are usually found with sand and brine, and some of the constituents of the deposits contain elements such as oxygen, sulphur and nitrogen. Video45.Oil_and_Gas_Formation.mp4. The components of petroleum are separated by fractional distillation, a process known as refining. Refining fuel [Revisit Topic 2.3, mixtures, elements and compounds]. A simplified diagram of the fractional distillation of petroleum and the fractions collected is shown. Figure288.3.1.carbon_in_life_image_017.jpg. Figure289.3.1.carbon_in_life_image_018.jpg. Figure290.3.1.carbon_in_life_image_019.jpg. Video46.Petroleum_refining_processes.mp4. As smaller fractions can be used as fuel and chemical feedstock, the demand for smaller fractions is generally higher than that of larger fractions such as bitumen. To meet these demands, larger fractions are cracked to form smaller hydrocarbon molecules. Note: Cracking is important as it converts larger fractions of petroleum, which are of lower demand, into small hydrocarbons which are in high demand, and in addition, cracking provides the source of hydrogen for the production of ammonia in the Haber process. Cracking of gas oil. Fractional distillation of crude oil above only yields 20% of the petrol. More petrol is produced by the cracking process. Cracking is breaking down the large molecules of oils into smaller molecules of petrol and gases, by use of heat or a catalyst. The gases are usually a mixture of small alkanes (fuel of high quality) and useful alkenes, and hydrogen is sometimes produced as well. Figure291.3.1.carbon_in_life_image_020.jpg. Types of cracking. 1) Thermal cracking. Gas oil can be heated to around 500°C under high pressure, allowing it to remain in the liquid phase. This liquid product is then fractionated to obtain various fractions, including petrol. 2) Steam cracking. Oil or natural gas are heated to temperatures around 800°C to 900°C in the presence of steam. The heating duration typically ranges from seconds to minutes, based on process conditions and desired outcomes. The process gives a variety of hydrocarbon products such as petrol (gasoline), fuel oil, alkenes (olefins), and hydrogen gas. 3) Catalytic cracking. This commonly utilizes zeolite-based catalysts, with aluminium (III) oxide and silicon (IV) oxide also considered as possible catalysts. The process typically occurs at relatively lower temperatures (around 450°C to 550°C) and pressures. It is known for producing high-quality petrol. Uses of alkanes: 1) Alkanes are used as fuels e.g., natural gas and coal gas. 2) Methane when heated to 1000°C decomposes to form hydrogen and carbon black (lamp black) which is used to make printer’s ink, paints and carbon papers. 3) Bottled gas (liquefied propane and butane) is used for welding. Alkenes. Alkenes are unsaturated hydrocarbons which contain a double bond between two carbon atoms in the molecule. They have a general formula CₙH₂ₙ where ₙ=2 or more. Note: A 1-carbon alkene cannot exist. The alkenes are unsaturated hydrocarbons because the carbon atoms do not exert their normal valency. An unsaturated compound is one in which a carbon atom does not exert all its combining power with other atoms. This compound will possess a multiple bond. The molecules of alkenes are characterized by one carbon to carbon double bond (C=C). Nomenclature. The alkenes derive their names from alkanes with the same number of carbon atoms by replacing the suffix -ane in all alkanes by the suffix -ene for alkenes. Figure292.3.1.carbon_in_life_image_021.jpg. Isomerism. Isomerism in alkenes begins when ₙ=4 i.e., from butene. Isomers of butene are: Figure293.3.1.carbon_in_life_image_022.jpg. Note: Ethene is the simplest alkene with molecular formula, C₂H₄. General characteristics of alkenes. The first 3 members of the alkene series are gases, alkenes with 5-15 carbon atoms are liquids and the higher alkenes are solids. Alkenes are generally insoluble in water but soluble in organic solvents like ethanol. They have a characteristic smell and burn with a luminous flame. They are typically more volatile than alkanes, leading to lower boiling and melting points compared to corresponding alkanes, and with even higher densities. Chemical reactions of alkenes. Alkenes are generally more reactive than corresponding alkanes. They undergo the following reactions. 1) Combustion. Like alkanes, alkenes undergo complete combustion when there is sufficient oxygen to form carbon dioxide and water only. They undergo incomplete combustion to produce soot and carbon monoxide. Due to the higher carbon-to-hydrogen ratio, alkenes burn with a smokier flame than their corresponding alkanes. Ethene burns in air with a clean, blue flame. C₂H₄(g) + 3O₂(g) → 2CO₂(g) + 2H₂O(g). 2) Addition reactions of Ethene. Ethene and other unsaturated compounds undergo addition reactions. An addition reaction is one in which a molecule adds to an unsaturated compound by breaking the double bond or triple bond. (i) Reaction with halogens. Halogens can be added across the C=C bond at room temperature and pressure to produce halogenoalkanes. a) Ethene is bubbled through liquid bromine in a test tube. Observation: The reddish–brown bromine turns to a colourless, oily liquid i.e., bromine water is decolourized or the red brown colour of bromine is discharged. Equation. Ethene + bromine → Dibromoethane. CH₂=CH₂(g) + Br₂(l) → CH₂BrCH₂Br(l). This is the common test for unsaturation in the laboratory. b) When ethene is bubbled through bromine water in a test tube, the red colour disappears due to the reaction between ethene and bromine molecules (Br₂) in the solution. Although bromine water is an aqueous solution of hydrobromic acid (HBr) and hypobromous acid (HOBr), Br₂ is the primary reactant. Ethene reacts with Br₂ to form 1,2-dibromoethane (C₂H₄Br₂). C₂H₄(g) + Br₂(aq) → C₂H₄Br₂(aq). c) When chlorine gas is mixed with ethane and the mixture left in sunlight, the two combine forming a colourless oily liquid called 1,2-dichloroethane. This reaction is a common method for synthesizing 1,2-dichloroethane in the laboratory. Figure296.3.1.carbon_in_life_image_025.jpg. (ii) Reaction with acidified potassium manganate (VII). Ethene is bubbled through acidified potassium manganate (VII) in a test tube. Figure297.3.1.carbon_in_life_image_026.jpg. Observation: The purple potassium manganate (VII) turns colourless. This test is an alternative test for unsaturation. (iii) Hydrogenation (addition of hydrogen). When a mixture of hydrogen gas and ethene gas is passed over a finely divided nickel catalyst at around 200°C (moderately high temperature), ethane is formed. Platinum, capable of operating at much lower temperatures, even at room temperature, can also serve as a catalyst for this reaction. CH₂=CH₂(g) + H₂(g) → CH₃CH₃(g). C₂H₄(g) + H₂(g) → C₂H₆(g). The hydrogenation reaction is employed in the hardening of liquid vegetable oils into solid fats. Margarine for example, is produced by partially hydrogenating vegetable oils. Vegetable oils, like soybean or corn oil, are typically polyunsaturated, containing multiple double bonds (C=C) in their fatty acid chains. During partial hydrogenation, some, but not all, of these C=C bonds are broken by adding hydrogen molecules across them. This reduces the number of double bonds and makes the oil more solid at room temperature, creating a spreadable consistency similar to butter. iv) Addition of steam. Alcohols can be produced from the addition of steam to alkenes. This takes place at a temperature of 300°C and a pressure of 60atm, in the presence of phosphoric acid, which acts as a catalyst. ethene + steam → ethanol. C₂H₄(g) + H₂O(g) → C₂H₅OH(l). v) Reaction with sulphuric acid. When ethene comes into contact with fuming sulphuric acid, a powerful electron acceptor, it undergoes an addition reaction to form ethyl hydrogen sulphate, an oily liquid. CH₂=CH₂(g) + H₂SO₄(l) → CH₃CH₂HSO₄(l). This intermediate can be further converted into ethanol by heating it with water. The hydrolysis step breaks apart the ethyl hydrogen sulphate molecule, releasing ethanol and regenerating the sulphuric acid. In this way, the sulphuric acid acts as a catalyst for the overall conversion of ethene to ethanol. CH₃CH₂HSO₄(l) + H₂O(l) → CH₃CH₂OH(l) + H₂SO₄(l). vi) Polymerization. Alkene molecules can undergo addition polymerization, linking together to form large, saturated molecules called polymers. This process typically requires high temperatures and/or pressures, often in the presence of a specialized catalyst. Ethene can be efficiently polymerized to form polyethene, a white, waxy solid plastic. This reaction occurs at a high temperature (around 200°C) and pressure, using a catalyst like a free radical initiator or a Ziegler-Natta catalyst. While oxygen technically has the potential to initiate polymerization, it's generally not the preferred catalyst, due to its inefficiency and potential negative effects on the polymer chain length. The equation, ethene → poly(ethene), nC₂H₄(g) → (C₂H₄)n(s), represents the overall reaction. Here, n signifies the variable number of ethene units that link together to form a polyethene molecule, with chain length depending on various factors. Uses of alkenes. 1) Ethene. It is a versatile starting material in many industrial processes. It's a major building block for various plastics, including the widely used polythene used in electrical cables, packaging films, and a wide range of other products. It also plays a role in the commercial ripening of fruits like bananas, acting as a plant hormone that triggers the ripening process. While less common, ethene can be converted into ethanol through chemical reactions. Additionally, ethene is used in the production of some refrigerants and antifreeze agents. 2) Propene. It is a key precursor for polypropylene, a widely used plastic with applications in textiles, packaging, and various moulded products. Propene is also used in the production of some synthetic rubbers and acrylic fibres. Preparation of ethene from ethanol. Ethene can be obtained from the dehydration of ethanol by excess hot concentrated sulphuric acid. This is sometimes called a condensation reaction because a molecule of water is eliminated from the alcohol to form an alkene. Figure294.3.1.carbon_in_life_image_023.jpg. The mixture is heated on a sand bath until the thermometer reading is about 180⁰C. Ethene is evolved and passed through a wash bottle containing concentrated potassium hydroxide solution to remove sulphur dioxide, a bi-product in small amounts, as the concentrated sulphuric acid used in the dehydration process, partially oxidizes some of the ethanol. The alkali also removes fumes of the acid. Ethene is collected over water since it is slightly insoluble in water. Sometimes, aluminium sulphate is added to the reaction to reduce frothing. Conditions for the reaction. (i) Excess concentrated sulphuric acid. (ii) Heating to a temperature of 180⁰C. Equation. Figure295.3.1.carbon_in_life_image_024.jpg. Alternative method: Ethene can also be obtained from the catalytic dehydration of ethanol. Ethanol soaked in glass wool is heated strongly. It vaporizes and its vapour is passed over heated aluminium (III) oxide. Ethene is obtained and collected over water. C₂H₅OH(l) → C₂H₄(g) + H₂O(l). Physical properties of ethene. Ethene is a colourless and non-poisonous gas. It has a faint sweet smell. It’s slightly soluble in water but soluble in organic solvents e.g., benzene and methyl benzene. It is slightly less dense than air. It’s neutral to litmus. Alkynes. Alkynes are unsaturated hydrocarbons containing one triple bond between two carbon atoms in their molecule. They have the general formula CₙH₂ₙ₋₂, where ₙ ≥ 2. Alkynes are named following the alkane naming convention, but with the suffix "-ane" replaced by "-yne". The name is based on the number of carbon atoms in the alkyne chain itself. The formula for ethyne, the simplest alkyne, is C₂H₂. The formula for propyne is C₃H₄. Preparation of ethyne. Calcium carbide can be used in the laboratory to prepare ethyne gas. In this process, calcium carbide crystals are placed in a flask, sometimes with sand for support. Cold water is then added dropwise to the calcium carbide. The reaction between calcium carbide and water is exothermic, meaning it releases heat. Ethyne gas, which is colourless and less dense than air, is produced along with calcium hydroxide. CaC₂(s) + 2H₂O(l) → Ca(OH)₂(s) + C₂H₂(g) + heat. The ethyne gas can then be collected by upward delivery/downward displacement of air since it is less dense than air or over water since it is slightly soluble in it. • In groups, research on and explain the characteristics of alkanes, alkenes, alcohols, and carboxylic acids on a poster and then classify common carbon compounds such as ethanol, methanoic acid, butane, ethene, ethane, methanol, butanoic acid, and propene. • Individually, revisit prior learning on fractional distillation and use it to explain on a poster how crude oil can be separated into fractions by distillation. In groups, then discuss and list the main fractions in order of boiling point, and discuss their uses in everyday life (fuel, polymers, drugs, dyes, pesticides, explosives, and soapless detergents). [Assignment 5] {What are alcohols, is ethanol an alcohol, how is it obtained, what are its uses and dangers of abusing it}. Video33.A_brief_history_of_alcohol.mp4. Alcohols/Alkanols. Alcohols are a homologous series of organic compounds which contain a hydroxyl group (-OH) joined to the hydrocarbon molecule. They have a general formula, CₙH₂ₙ₊₁OH. Nomenclature. Alcohols are named after corresponding alkanes by replacing the –e of the suffix -ane in alkanes with -ol. Figure298.3.1.carbon_in_life_image_027.jpg. Alcohols are liquids at room temperature and pressure and are very volatile. As the molecular sizes of the alcohols increases down the series, the forces of attraction between the molecules become stronger. As a result, the melting and boiling points increase with larger molecular size. Smaller alcohols are miscible in water. As the molecular size of the alcohols increases, solubility in water decreases. An important member of the homologous series is ethanol, which has a wide range of uses. Physical properties of Ethanol. Ethanol is a colourless, mobile, hydroscopic liquid. It has a pleasant smell and a burning taste. It is a volatile liquid and boils at 78˚C. It has a density of around 0.8g/cm³ and mixes with water in any proportion (It is very soluble in water). Video52.What_Are_Alcohols.mp4. Chemical reactions of alcohols. 1) Combustion. Alcohols undergo complete combustion when there's sufficient oxygen, producing carbon dioxide and water. Heating them with oxidizing agents like acidified potassium permanganate can cause oxidation. The resulting product, aldehyde or carboxylic acid, depends on the type of alcohol and reaction conditions. Ethanol, for example, burns completely in air with a slightly bluish flame to form carbon dioxide and water. C₂H₅OH(l) + 3O₂(g) → 2CO₂(g) + 3H₂O(g). 2) Dehydration of ethanol (refer to the preparation of ethene from ethanol covered earlier in this chapter). Preparation of ethanol from carbohydrates. Ethanol can be prepared by the process of fermentation of carbohydrates such as starch and sugars. Fermentation is a process in which carbohydrates like starch and sugars are converted to alcohol by enzymes. The enzymatic break down of glucose yields simple compounds like ethanol and carbon dioxide. Some heat is as well generated. Fermentation takes place in the absence of oxygen (anaerobic process). Preparation of ethanol from starch. Cassava is crushed and heated in steam under pressure to extract starch. Starch is heated with malt at a temperature of 60˚C for about an hour. Malt contains an enzyme diastase which hydrolyses starch to maltose. Figure299.3.1.carbon_in_life_image_028.jpg. Yeast is added to the mixture at 37°C, in the absence of oxygen and the mixture left to ferment for 2-3 days. The enzymes in yeast work best at this temperature. Increasing the temperature would denature the enzymes and cause them to be unable to catalyse the reaction. Yeast contains two enzymes, maltase and zymase. Maltase catalyses the hydrolysis of maltose to glucose as below. Figure300.3.1.carbon_in_life_image_029.jpg. Zymase catalyses the breakdown of glucose into ethanol and carbon dioxide, producing heat in the process. Figure301.3.1.carbon_in_life_image_030.jpg. Fermentation produces a dilute solution of ethanol. High concentrations of ethanol cannot be obtained directly from this process as the yeast dies when the concentration of ethanol reaches about 15%. The ethanol obtained is fractionally distilled to concentrate it, and a distillate below 95˚C is collected. The distillate is redistilled between (78–82)˚C. If absolutely dry ethanol is needed, dehydrating agents like calcium oxide can be used to remove any remaining water. Figure302.3.1.carbon_in_life_image_031.jpg. Fractional distillation of fermented liquor. Fractional distillation is a fundamental process in the production of fermented liquors like whiskey, rum, and brandy. Following fermentation, the resulting liquid, known as the "wash" or "mash," undergoes distillation in a still. [Revisit Topic 2.3, mixtures, elements and compounds]. Large scale manufacture of ethanol. Ethanol can also be produced on a larger scale through the addition of steam to ethene (check chemical reactions of alcohols). This process produces an ethanol solution of higher purity and concentration compared to fermentation. Traditional/Local manufacture of ethanol. Alcohol, specifically ethanol, can be locally produced from a wide range of starchy foods through fermentation. Starchy foods such as grains (e.g., millet, corn, barley, rice), tubers (e.g., potatoes, cassava), and fruits (e.g., bananas, grapes, apples) contain sugars or starches that can be converted into alcohol by yeast during the fermentation process. 1) From banana. The banana juice is extracted from ripe bananas by squeezing them using spear grass leaves. The juice is filtered to remove any solid impurities. The filtrate is then poured into a locally made wooden container, where it is mixed with ground roasted sorghum flour. The container is covered and the mixture is allowed to ferment for two days in a warm place. The resulting solution is crude ethanol, locally known as “tonto”. 2) From millet. Millet is ground to form millet flour and the flour is mixed with water to form a paste which is covered in a container or buried in the ground for about 6 days, so that it can ferment. The fermented paste is removed and roasted to obtain malt. The malt is then dried in the sun. Dry germinated millet grains are ground and added to malt in a drum. A carefully determined amount of water is then added to form a liquid mixture. The mixture is covered and stored in a warm place for 3 days, to form an alcoholic drink, locally known as “marwa”. Beer is made by the fermentation of the starch in barley; Wine by the fermentation of sugars in grapes. Spirits are obtained by distillation of dilute solutions produced by fermentation and therefore have an increased alcoholic content. Video43.Making_Alcohols_by_Fermentation_and_from_Ethene.mp4. Uses of ethanol. It is used in the manufacture of perfumes, flavours, drugs and varnishes. It is used in thermometers measuring low temperatures. It is added to petrol and used as fuel. It is used in the manufacture of aftershaves and moisturising creams. It is used as a preservative and for sterilization. It has applications in the pharmaceutical industry as an antiseptic and disinfectant. It is used in the making of alcoholic beverages e.g., beers, wines and spirits. It is used as a solvent for paints, varnishes, etc. Additionally, it can be used as a chemical feedstock for the production of other chemicals. Carboxylic Acids. Carboxylic acids are a fundamental group of organic acids characterized by the presence of a carboxyl functional group (-COOH). These acids also have a general formula for the entire molecule as CₙH₂ₙ₊₁COOH (where ₙ ≥ 1). The general formula, CₙH₂ₙO₂ can also be used. Their names typically end in "oic acid". The first four members of the carboxylic acid homologous series are shown in the figure below. Figure303.3.1.carbon_in_life_image_032.jpg. Carboxylic acids are widespread in nature and even in everyday items. For example, acetic acid is found in vinegar, citric acid is present in citrus fruits like lemons, and vitamin C is also a carboxylic acid. These molecules play various roles in biological processes and have numerous industrial applications. Chemical Properties of Carboxylic Acids. Carboxylic acids are weak acids that partially dissociate in water to give hydrogen ions, thus, they undergo reactions of acids. Carboxylic acids react with metals that are positioned above hydrogen in the reactivity series to produce a salt (a metal carboxylate) and hydrogen. Ethanoic acid + magnesium → magnesium ethanoate + hydrogen. 2CH₃COOH(aq) + Mg(s) → (CH₃COO)₂Mg(aq) + H₂(g). Carboxylic acids react with metal carbonates to produce a salt, carbon dioxide and water. ethanoic acid + calcium carbonate → calcium ethanoate + carbon dioxide + water. 2CH₃COOH(aq) + CaCO₃(s) → (CH₃COO)₂Ca(aq) + CO₂(g) + H₂O(l). Carboxylic acids react with metal hydroxides to produce a salt and water. ethanoic acid + sodium hydroxide → sodium ethanoate + water. CH₃COOH(aq) + NaOH(aq) → CH₃COONa(aq) + H₂O(l). [For more details, refer to your notes on acids and alkalis]. In particular, ethanoic acid, also known as acetic acid, is a versatile player in many industries. It's the main ingredient in vinegar, adding a tangy flavour to food and acting as a natural preservative. In industry, it's used to produce a variety of chemicals like esters (found in fragrances) and polymers (used in plastics and textiles). It can also act as a solvent for various materials. It even finds applications in pharmaceuticals and agriculture. Generally, carboxylic acids react with alcohols to produce an ester and water. Esters are a class of organic compounds formed by the reaction between an alcohol and a carboxylic acid. They are sweet-smelling liquids that are used for making soap; as solvents for perfumes, drugs, etc; for making artificial food flavourings; and high esters such as wax can be used for making candles. They occur naturally in plants and can be produced through esterification from the reaction between alcohols and carboxylic acids. They have a formula RCOOR¹, where R and R¹ are alkyl groups. Esterification requires heating an alcohol and a carboxylic acid with a few drops of concentrated sulphuric acid as a catalyst. This process is a reversible reaction. Figure304.3.1.carbon_in_life_image_033.jpg. Apart from acting as a catalyst in the reaction, concentrated sulphuric acid is a dehydrating agent and removes the water produced. This also speeds up the rate of product formation. Note that there are two parts to the name of an ester. The first part of the name is taken from the alcohol, while the second part is taken from the carboxylic acid from which it is made. • In groups, make a poster to show the structure of ethanol, explaining in an equation how it can be made from glucose sugar, and explain the conditions necessary for successful fermentation. Debate and report on the uses of ethanol and how excess consumption of alcoholic drinks can have serious consequences. Soap and detergents. [Assignment 6] {What are soapy detergents, how are they made from natural fats and oils and why are they effective in removing oily stains}. Soap, a soapy detergent, is a type of cleaning agent made from the sodium or potassium salts of long-chain carboxylic acids, such as stearic acid. Common examples of soap molecules include sodium stearate (C₁₇H₃₅COONa) and potassium stearate (C₁₇H₃₅COOK). Manufacture of soap. The process of making soap using an alkali and fat/oil (ester) is known as saponification. NaOH often provides harder, more durable soaps while KOH is often used to produce soft bars or liquid soaps that are mainly used as toilet soaps. However, note that both NaOH and KOH can produce hard, soft, or liquid soaps depending on the chosen fat/oil. There isn't a strict rule that NaOH guarantees harder soaps and KOH, softer ones. Safety precaution: Sodium hydroxide (lye) is a strong alkali and can cause severe burns. It's crucial to wear proper safety gear (gloves, goggles) when handling lye. Procedure: Boil vegetable oil (from coconut, ground nuts, cotton, etc.,) or animal fat (from cattle or sheep) with concentrated sodium hydroxide solution until a uniform solution is obtained (until frothing stops). Allow the solution to cool since the reaction between a vegetable oil and an alkali is exothermic, i.e., heat is given out during the reaction. Concentrated solution of sodium chloride (brine) is added to precipitate the soap which floats on the surface. Sodium chloride lowers the solubility of soap in the mixture. The process of precipitating the soap is known as ―salting out. The soap is then removed and treated further to produce pure soap. Perfumes, dyes and disinfectants may be added to make toilet soap e.g., Geisha. Note: Oils are liquid esters at room temperature whereas fats are solids at room temperature. Vegetable fat if needed, could be obtained from coconut. Figure305.3.1.carbon_in_life_image_034.jpg. Figure306.3.1.carbon_in_life_image_035.jpg. Herbal soap formulation and production. Natural soaps are manufactured via either a cold or hot saponification process, but cold saponification process is most favoured. Figure307.3.1.carbon_in_life_image_036.jpg. Procedure of making herbal soap. Making herbal soap with the cold process method equally requires caution due to lye (sodium hydroxide). Wear protective gear! The process involves preparing a lye solution carefully, then separately prepping your vegetable oils (some recipes may pre-heat them to a temperature of 200°C to 250°C while stirring occasionally for two to five hours). The vegetable oil is then added to the soap base in a plastic container gradually while stirring, until it thickens to a "trace" consistency. Once the paste like solution is formed, herbal extracts are added. Stirring is continued until a fairly heavy homogenous paste is formed. Additives like perfume, honey and colour are added and stirring continued for approximately 2 minutes, until the paste is homogeneous. The resulting paste is poured into plastic or wooden moulds (covered with a plastic film) in the desired forms. The paste is dried in the shade or open air for two to four weeks, depending on the type of soap desired. Soap usually matures with in one to two weeks. After this drying phase, the soap needs additional curing time (4-6 weeks) to fully harden and become ready for use! Remember to always follow a trusted cold process soap recipe and prioritize safety when working with lye. Video36.How_Bath_Soap_is_Made.mp4. Cleaning action of soap. Soap emulsifies oil/grease into tiny droplets/micelles in water. The polar end of soap/hydrophilic head dissolves in water and soap ions surround fat droplets. The non polar end of soap/hydrophobic tail dissolves in oil/grease that holds dirt on fabric. Figure308.3.1.carbon_in_life_image_037.jpg. Agitation causes emulsification of oil/grease and then the dirty tiny droplets are released into a suspension and rinsed away by clean water. From a broader perspective, soap acts by lowering the surface tension between water and oil/grease/other water insoluble materials and also emulsifies them. Micelles, formed by the arrangement of soap molecules in water, are essential for the cleaning action of soap. When soap is introduced into water containing oil or grease, the hydrophobic tails of the soap molecules cluster together to form the core of the micelle, while the hydrophilic heads remain on the outer surface, interacting with the water molecules. This structure enables soap to emulsify oil and grease, trapping them within the micelles and allowing them to be rinsed away with water. Agitation aids in dispersing oil and grease, facilitating the formation of micelles and enhancing the cleaning process. Note that the dirt is insoluble in water, as it is often organic in nature. When water is hard, soap first reacts with the dissolved calcium and magnesium ions to form scum (refer to your notes on carbon in the environment). Disadvantage of soap. Soap forms scum with hard water and a lot of it has to be used to produce sufficient lather for washing. Additionally, its higher pH can irritate skin and damage fabrics over time. Compared to detergents, soap offers less versatility in cleaning different types of dirt and may not work as well in cold water. • In groups, plan, carry out and report on an investigation to find out how effective different types of soap are at removing a food stain on cotton fabric and research on how soap emulsifies fats and oils. • In groups, use sodium chloride, coconut oil (25cc) and 20% sodium hydroxide (30cc) to create a suspension and 15g salt to create a solid (soap) which is separated by filtering. Individually, then record the process using flow charts and words such as suspension, precipitation, and solution. [Assignment 7] {What are soapless detergents, how are they made from crude oil, why are they better cleaning agents in hard water than the soapy detergents and why do they have a more deleterious effect on the environment}. Soapless (synthetic) detergents. A detergent is any substance that facilitates the emulsification and removal of oil/grease. This means that soap is also a detergent although the name is used for other substitutes of soap like Omo, Nomi, Ariel, Toss, etc. The synthetic detergents function in the same way as soap but they are more soluble than soap (the calcium and magnesium salts of the hydrocarbon sulphonic acids of which detergents are composed, are soluble in water) and therefore clean more effectively. In addition, soapless detergents are more effective than ordinary soap in hard water, since they do not form scum. Laboratory Preparation of soapless detergents: The soapless detergents are made from concentrated sulphuric acid and hydrocarbons obtained from petrol refining. Safety precaution: Concentrated sulphuric acid is a strong acid and requires careful handling. Procedure: To 1cm³ of a desired hydrocarbon (obtained from petrol refining) in a test tube is added 2cm³ concentrated sulphuric acid and the mixture stirred with a glass rod. The mixture is then gently warmed and to it, about 10cm³ of 4M sodium hydroxide is added and stirring done. The mixture gets hot, viscous and dark. The product obtained is added to distilled water and stirred to remove excess acid. The solid left on decanting (the soapless detergent) is then washed with distilled water. Soapless detergents are manufactured in solid form (powders) or liquid form (washing liquids and shampoos). Some detergents contain whitening agents, like optical brighteners, which enhance the appearance of fabrics by absorbing UV light and emitting visible blue light. Some detergents contain phosphates to prevent scum formation. Phosphates serve as water softeners, preventing the precipitation of insoluble calcium and magnesium salts, which can cause scum on clothes and surfaces. While phosphates were once common, alternative water-softening are now preferred due to environmental concerns. Sodium perborate is often added to washing powders to give them a mild bleaching action. Sodium sulphate and silicate are added to keep the powder dry and free flowing. Some powders also contain enzymes to digest organic dirt like food stains and blood. However, it's important to remember that commercial detergent production is a complex process with many ingredients and considerations beyond a simple experiment. While both soap and soapless detergents remove dirt and grease, soapless detergents offer advantages. They work effectively in hard water, bypassing scum formation, and their superior solubility creates more lather for better cleaning, especially in laundry applications where their concentrated form can be more economical. However, soapless detergents tend to be pricier and some formulations might use phosphates that can cause eutrophication, harming water bodies. Modern detergents often address this with alternative builders. Ultimately, the choice depends on water hardness, cleaning needs, and environmental impact. Soapless detergents excel in hard water and concentrated cleaning, while soap remains a classic choice for budget-minded users or those seeking a potentially lower environmental footprint. Please note that we shall expand on the work of soapy and soapless reagents in the chapter of chemicals for consumables later on. Figure308.3.1.carbon_in_life_image_137.jpg. Video39.How_does_soap_work.mp4. Video40.How_Soap_Works.mp4. • In groups, plan, carry out and report on an investigation to compare how well a soapy and a soapless detergent form lather in soft water and in hard water. Then compare your findings with others. • In groups, research, discuss and report on why a soapless detergent is more efficient for cleaning in a hard water area than a soapy detergent. Explain why problems are created when soapless detergents are released into the environment. Common organic compounds derived from living things. In particular, sucrose, the ordinary sugar we eat every day is an organic molecule. Sucrose, also known as table sugar, does more than just add sweetness to our food. It's a key ingredient for baked goods, providing structure and browning. In the food industry, sucrose acts as a preservative in jams and jellies, and its fermentability makes it crucial for alcoholic beverages and some vinegars. Beyond food, sucrose finds uses in pharmaceuticals as a bulking agent and even in some industrial processes as a starting material for biofuels. Sucrose is a disaccharide, composed of two monosaccharide units, glucose and fructose, joined together by a glycosidic bond. Specifically, one molecule of glucose combines with one molecule of fructose to form sucrose (refer to the chapter of Nutrition in plants and animals in Biology). Extraction of sucrose (sugar) from sugar cane. In Uganda, sugar is made from sugarcane plants. Mature sugar cane plants are cut into small pieces, then crushed with water and squeezed to force out the juice which contains mainly sucrose. The extracted juice undergoes clarification to remove impurities such as plant fibres, proteins, and other non-sugar compounds. The clarification process typically involves adding lime to the juice and heating it in large tanks to coagulate and precipitate the impurities, which are then removed through filtration or decantation. After clarification, the juice is concentrated by evapouration in multiple stages. This concentration process is carried out in vacuum evaporators that introduce low pressure, so that the liquid boils at a temperature below 100⁰C to economise heat and minimise the decomposition of sugar to carbon. The concentration process produces a mixture of sugar crystals and a thick liquid called molasses. The impure brown sugar crystals are then separated from the molasses in a centrifuge and taken to the refinery for purification. To obtain white sugar crystals, the brown sugar is dissolved in water and the solution boiled with animal charcoal. The mixture is filtered to remove the charcoal and the filtrate evaporated as before to form white sugar crystals. Molasses is used to make an alcoholic drink called rum and as a cattle feed. Generally, the extraction of sugar from sugar cane involves a series of steps to extract, purify, and concentrate the sugar present in the cane juice to crystalline sugar. Video72.How_Sugar_Is_Made.mp4. • Individually, research and report on the uses of some common organic compounds derived from living things, such as ethanol, sucrose and ethanoic acid. Polymers. Polymers are common macromolecules. Please go back to topic 2.1 and cover polymers in depth. A few figures have been included below, to compliment the theory covered back then. The formation of an amide linkage between the carboxyl and amine groups results in the loss of a water molecule. Figure309.3.1.carbon_in_life_image_038.jpg. Figure310.3.1.carbon_in_life_image_039.jpg. The formation of an ester linkage between the carboxyl and hydroxyl groups results in the loss of a water molecule. Figure311.3.1.carbon_in_life_image_040.jpg. Figure312.3.1.carbon_in_life_image_041.jpg. [Assignment 8] {Identify some common synthetic and natural polymers and relate their properties to their uses}. Fibres are polymers which can be drawn into threads. Figure313.3.1.carbon_in_life_image_042.jpg. Natural polymers are polymers primarily formed by condensation and exist in nature. Figure314.3.1.carbon_in_life_image_043.jpg. Thermo-softening plastics are plastics which soften or melt when heated and harden when cooled. Figure315.3.1.carbon_in_life_image_044.jpg. There are two common types of polythene i.e., low-density polyethene and high-density polythene. Figure316.3.1.carbon_in_life_image_045.jpg. Figure317.3.1.carbon_in_life_image_046.jpg. Where ₙ = about 600. Thermosetting plastics have polymer chains which are bonded/linked to each other. Figure318.3.1.carbon_in_life_image_047.jpg. Vulcanisation of natural rubber. Figure319.3.1.carbon_in_life_image_048.jpg. • In groups, research and make a poster to explain how methane is used to make other organic compounds which in turn can be used to make a wide range of useful natural or synthetic polymers including plastics, starch, cellulose, proteins, sugars, fats and oils. Research on the properties and uses of some polymers;