TOPIC 03 ***CONSTITUTIONALISM IN UGANDA*** "15 Periods". Competency; The understands the rule of law in the constitution of Uganda roles, principles and issues related to parliament, the constitution, the judiciary, citizenship, political parties, elections, how you relate to a democratic government. Learning Outcomes; The learner should be able to; a) understand the importance of the national constitution, national symbols, and values as given in the constitution (v, k, s); b) know series of constitutional reviews Uganda has had since 1962; c) understand the role of the citizen in the constitutional making process (k, u); d) understand the structure of the Ugandan parliament, and the roles of the people and bodies within it (u); e) appreciate the role of the police, prisons and the army (u, v); f) know the role of the judiciary in Uganda. • use the Internet or library research and find out about the Ugandan constitution and its values, identify the key national symbols: the national anthem, coat of arms, national emblems, and national flag. • In groups, use ICT or library research and find out series of constitutions Uganda has had since independence, write a report and present to class as the rest take notes. • Engage in a discussion on the constitutional rights, duties and responsibilities of a citizen, in which you discuss current or past events where these rights and duties have been challenged. • carry out a research and draw a flow chart to describe the procedure for conducting local and national government elections. • discuss the strengths and the weaknesses of the election process in Uganda. • listen to a talk by a government official about how the Ugandan parliament works, and ask questions to understand the work of the speaker and other leading figures, committees, commissioners and the cabinet. • visit the local courts, observe your work, and have your questions answered by an official. • Invite a government official to speak to the class about the differing roles of the police, prisons and army. prepare to engage in a question and answer session with the visitor, writing up what you have learned. • develop a timeline on constitutionalism and artistically illustrate it to share information on the involvement of the Uganda Constitution since independence.
