In regard to our day to day life, food materials such as glucose undergo oxidation to generate energy. Oxidation accounts for the the colour changes in fleshy fruits when cut. Hydrogen peroxide used as an anti-septic on minor cuts and burns of the skin to prevent infection, relies on an oxidation reaction. Could there be a false statement?;
Oxidation can be seen as the gain of oxygen, the loss of hydrogen, the loss of electrons or the increase in oxidation number of a substance. Reduction can be seen as the loss of oxygen, the gain of hydrogen, the gain of electrons or the decrease in oxidation number of a substance. Is this all true?;
An element has an oxidation state of 0, regardless of whether it is found as individual atoms or in molecules. For example, neon (Ne) and chlorine (Cl₂) have oxidation states of 0. The sum of oxidation numbers of all atoms in an uncharged compound is 0. Could there be a false statement?;
In simple ions, the oxidation number matches the charge on the ion. For example, a magnesium ion and an oxide ion have oxidation states of +2 and -2 respectively. For a polyatomic ion, the sum of oxidation numbers of all atoms is equal to its charge. Is this all true?; 
Group I elements typically have a +1 oxidation state, while Group VII elements usually have an oxidation state of -1 in their compounds. Oxygen generally has an oxidation state of -2 in most compounds, and hydrogen often has an oxidation state of +1. However, chlorine for instance, can have other oxidation states besides -1, such as +1 in the compound hypochlorous acid. Could there be a false statement?;
In chemistry, the oxidation state, or oxidation number, is the hypothetical charge of an atom if all of its bonds to other atoms were fully ionic. Elements in their free state have an oxidation number of zero. In simple ions, the oxidation number matches the charge on the ion. The sum of oxidation numbers in a neutral compound is zero, balancing the positive and negative charges. Is this all true?;
What is the oxidation number of Mn in MnO₄⁻? (a) +5 (b) -5 (c) +7 (d) +6;
What is the oxidation number of S in SO₃? (a) +4 (b) -4 (c) +5 (d) +6;
An oxidizing agent is a substance that causes another substance to be oxidized. It achieves this by accepting electrons, gaining oxygen, or removing hydrogen from the substance being oxidized. In the process, the oxidizing agent itself undergoes reduction, meaning it gains electrons, loses oxygen, or gains hydrogen. Could there be a false statement?;
A reducing agent is a substance that causes another substance to be reduced. It achieves this by donating electrons, losing oxygen, or removing hydrogen. In the process, the reducing agent itself undergoes oxidation, meaning it loses electrons, gains oxygen, or loses hydrogen. Could there be a false statement?;
In the reaction between CuO and NH₃, CuO is an oxidizing agent and NH₃ is a reducing agent. In the reaction between PbO and H₂, PbO is an oxidizing agent and H₂ is a reducing agent. In the reaction between H₂S and SO₂, H₂S is a reducing agent and SO₂ is an oxidizing agent. Could there be a false statement?;
Redox reactions are everywhere. Our body uses redox reactions to convert food and oxygen to energy plus water and carbondioxide which are then exhaled. Batteries in most electronic gadgets such as calculators also rely on redox reactions to produce energy. Redox reactions are reactions in which reduction and oxidation take place simultaneously. Is this perfect?;
Metals, with their lower electronegativity, tend to lose electrons and act as reducing agents. In contrast, nonmetals, being more electronegative, have a high tendency to gain electrons and act as oxidizing agents. Could this be false?;
Electricity is a form of energy produced by the flow of electrons through materials. Materials, like copper wire, allow electricity to flow easily. Some, like zinc wire and graphite, can also conduct electricity under certain conditions. Could all that be true?;
The figure below shows a circuit with a battery, a bulb, and a switch connected by a copper wire. Figure130.4.1.oxidation_and_reduction_reactions_image_001.jpg. When the switch is closed, the circuit is complete. Electrons flow from the battery through the copper wire to the bulb, causing it to light up. Could this be false?;
A conductor is a substance in solid form which can conduct electricity. Examples include most metals and graphite. An insulator is a substance in solid form that does not conduct electricity. Examples are most nonmetals except a few, like graphite. Metals conduct electricity because they have delocalized but nonmetals do not have these delocalized electrons as they are all locked up in bond formation. Is this all true?;
Ethanol and urea do not conduct electricity, and are therefore called non electrolytes. Ammonium hydroxide and ethanoic acid weakly conduct electricity and are therefore weak electrolytes. CuSO₄ solution and hydrochloric acid strongly conduct electricity and are therefore strong electrolytes. Could there be a false statement;
Electrolysis is a process that uses direct current to drive a non-spontaneous chemical reaction, breaking apart a substance in solution or molten form into new substances. During electrolysis, the electrolyte breaks down at the electrodes, where the electrical current enters and exits the solution. Could this be true?;
Semiconductors are materials that have conductivity somewhere between conductors and insulators. Their conductivity can be significantly influenced by factors like doping and temperature. This unique property makes semiconductors crucial for many electronic devices, such as transistors and integrated circuits. Could this be false?;
When current is not passed through an electrolyte, the ions are wandering randomly in solution. However, when an electric current is applied, the cations are attracted to the negatively charged electrode, the cathode. On the other hand, the anions are attracted to the positively charged electrode, the anode. Is this all true?;
During electrolysis, ions undergo reactions at the electrodes due to the flow of electricity. This process, where ions gain or lose electrons to become neutral atoms, is called discharge. Preferential discharge is the choice of the ion to be discharged at each electrode when there is more than one type of positive or negative ions at the respective electrodes. Could there be a false statement?;
The lower the ion in the electrochemical series, the more readily it is discharged, since the energy required for discharge decreases down the electrochemical series. Ions of less reactive metals have a higher tendency of getting discharged as they are less stable as ions. Is this all true?;
Concentration is a major factor influencing which ions are discharged during electrolysis. Is it true that the more ions of a type are present, the less likely they are to be discharged at the electrode?;
Inert electrodes such as graphite or platinum, do not take part during electrolysis. Active electrodes e.g., copper normally take part during electrolysis by “going into solution’’. When used, they affect the reactions at electrodes. Some metal electrodes undergo oxidation more readily than anions in solution e.g., copper. Such reactions are used in the purification of metals. Is this all true?;
Half equations are equations showing the reactions taking place separately at the electrodes. An overall equation is one that combines the half equations at the electrodes thus representing the overall redox reaction. Is this false?;
Water solvates ions in an ionic compound, weakening crystal forces and promoting their mobility. It reacts with some molecular compounds to form ions. It provides H⁺ ions and OH⁻ ions in solution. Is this all true?;
In the electrolysis of dilute sulphuric acid, platinum or carbon rods are used as inert electrodes. During the electrolysis, 2 volumes of hydrogen is produced at the cathode and one volume of oxygen is formed at the anode. The pH of the solution remains relatively constant. Could this be false?;
In the electrolysis of dilute sodium hydroxide solution using carbon electrodes. At the anode, the hydroxyl ions are discharged giving off bubbles of a colourless gas that relights a glowing splint. At the cathode, bubbles of a colourless gas that burns with a pop sound are produced. Is this true?;
In the electrolysis of concentrated sodium chloride solution/brine using a mercury cathode and graphite/platinum anode, there is effervescence of a greenish-yellow gas at the anode, that bleaches damp litmus paper. The sodium atoms produced at the cathode form a shiny, silvery amalgam layer on the surface of the mercury cathode. Could there be a false statement?;
In the electrolysis of molten PbBr₂ using carbon electrodes, reddish-brown fumes are formed at the anode whereas shiny-grey beads are formed at the cathode and weight of the cathode increases. Is this true?;
In the electrolysis of concentrated solution of CuCl₂ using copper cathode and graphite anode, effervescence occurs at the anode and a greenish-yellow gas is evolved whereas a black solid is deposited at the cathode. Is this true?;
In the electrolysis of CuSO₄ solution using graphite electrodes, effervescence of a colourless gas that relights a glowing splint occurs at the anode whereas a brown solid of copper is deposited at the cathode and weight of the cathode increases. Is this true?;
In the electrolysis of CuSO₄ solution using copper anode and graphite cathode, both sulphate and hydroxide ions migrate to the anode but none is discharged. Instead, the copper anode goes into solution i.e., it dissolves to form Cu²⁺, a process is called electrode ionisation. The copper ions produced migrate to the cathode where they are deposited as as a brown solid. The anode increases in mass/size whereas the cathode decreases in mass/size. Is this true?;
In the electrolysis of concentrated hydrochloric acid using graphite electrodes, a green-yellow gas that bleaches damp litmus paper is evolved at the anode whereas a colourless gas that burns with a pop sound is evolved at the cathode. Is that all true?;
Uses of copper include electrical wiring: Making kettles, boilers, ornaments: Making alloys e.g., brass and bronze: Making coins since it is not easily attacked by air: Making water pipes and boilers. Could there be a wrong use of copper?;
In the purification of copper, impure copper is used as the anode while pure copper acts as the cathode. The electrodes are immersed in CuSO₄ solution. The weight of the anode decreases. Impurities present in the copper anode are left behind and may dissolve in the electrolyte or sink as sludge. The pure copper cathode gains mass. The colour of the solution relatively remains blue throughout the electrolysis process. Is this true?;
Aluminium objects may be coated with a thin layer of aluminium oxide using electricity, a process known as anodization. During the process, the aluminium object is made the anode and the electrolyte is dilute sulphuric acid. The aluminium oxide coating is important in preventing corrosion. Is this false?;
Is it true that more reactive metals such as sodium, potassium and aluminium are extracted by electrolysis of their molten compounds?; 
In electroplating, the metal to be plated is made the cathode and the plating metal is made the anode. The electrolyte is normally a soluble salt of the metal used for coating. For an effective electroplating: A clean cathode must be used, a steady current must flow, a steady temperature must be maintained and the concentration of the electrolytes must also be steady. Is this false?; 
Primary/galvanic cells rely on spontaneous chemical reactions to generate electricity. Is it true that these are disposable, like dry cells in your remote, and cannot be recharged after the reactants are used up?;
Secondary/electrolytic cells require an external electrical source to drive non-spontaneous chemical reactions. Is it true that these are not rechargeable and can't be used repeatedly?;
Electrochemical cells utilize redox reactions to convert chemical energy into electrical energy. Primary cells, non-rechargeable cells, basically consist of two half-cells of different elements. Each element is dipped in a solution of its own ions and is called an electrode. Is this all true?;
The Daniell cell consists of a zinc rod dipped in zinc sulphate solution, zinc half-cell and a copper half-cell, the solutions being separated by a porous partition or salt bridge. A salt bridge is an inverted U-tube made of glass and contains potassium chloride or potassium nitrate solution or pieces of filter paper wetted with these salts. Could this be false?;
The Daniell cell offers a stable and long-lasting source of electricity compared to some other primary cells due to minimal mixing of solutions. A dry cell is another common example of a primary cell. In a dry cell, the electrolyte is in the form of a paste, typically consisting of ammonium chloride and other components like zinc chloride and moisture-absorbing materials. Could this be true?;
The lead-acid battery used in vehicles to power the starter motor, is a classic example of a secondary cell consisting of six 2V cells connected in series. Each cell consists of two lead plates dipping into a 30% solution of sulphuric acid. One of the plates is coated with PbO₂. The lead plate and the lead (IV) oxide - coated plate have different electrode potentials, so when they are connected, current flows between them. Could this be false?;
From the tiny button cell powering your watch, to the large and powerful battery bank in a Tesla, electrochemical cells silently weave themselves into the fabric of our daily lives. Is it true that these versatile devices come in both disposable and rechargeable forms?;