TOPIC 3 ***Transport in Humans*** "80 PERIODS". Competency; The learner appreciates the mechanisms of transport of substances in the blood, and the immune system’s role in protecting the human body by analysing the processes and their role in the maintenance of human health, to prevent diseases in everyday life. Learning Outcomes; The learner should be able to; a) assess the role of the human heart in blood circulation and the role of haemoglobin in the transportation of gases in blood under various physiological conditions (u, s, gs, v/a); b) analyse the role of antibodies in vaccination and allergic reactions in relation to human body immunity (u, s, gs, v/a); a) In groups, search for: i) the transportation of oxygen and carbon dioxide in the body. ii) effect of different factors on the amount of oxygen in the blood. iii) the effect of carbon dioxide concentration on the heartbeat rate. iv) the responses of athletes versus non-athletes, and lowland dwellers versus highland dwellers, to exercise. Discuss, create audio-visual presentations, and share with other groups. b) In groups, be provided with case studies on carbon monoxide poisoning. Analyse to find out the problems and causes and propose strategies to prevent/manage the challenges. Make a write-up and present your findings to the other groups. c) In groups, watch/listen to video clips/animations or search on the myogenic action of the heart and nervous control of heartbeat rate. Discuss and make illustrations, present your work, and critique the group findings. a) search for and discuss: i) types of immunity (innate and adaptive). ii) the concept of vaccination. iii) role of histamine in allergy. iv) new-born haemolytic disease. In groups, make write-ups and present your work to the class plenary. b) search for the structure and action of antibodies, discuss and: i) design antibody models, and create visual presentations to share with other groups: ii) Search for the mechanism used in rapid test kits to detect infections. In groups, make write-ups and present your work to the class plenary;
