TOPIC 5 ***Homeostasis*** "78 PERIODS". Competency; The learner evaluates the regulation and maintenance of optimal internal environment in living organisms by analysing how organ systems generate and eliminate metabolic wastes and maintain the functioning of cells, to make life choices that promote wellness. Learning Outcomes; The learner should be able to; a) analyse the homeostatic control system, focusing on the role of negative feedback mechanisms in maintaining internal stability (u, s, gs); b) examine the adaptations and management of different plant categories (xerophytes, mesophytes, and hydrophytes) based on their osmoregulatory abilities and the application of excretory plant products in everyday life (u, s, gs, v/a). a) In groups, search for: i) the significance of maintaining a stable internal environment. ii) components of an efficient homeostatic system. Make a write-up and share your findings with the class. b) In groups, use mind maps to: i) illustrate the physiological and behavioural adaptations of endotherms to survive in varying temperature conditions. ii) illustrate the role of the hypothalamus and skin in regulating temperature in endotherms. Groups present their mind maps to the rest of the class through a gallery walk. c) In groups, describe how ADH works to maintain water balance in the body. Make a write-up and present it in a class plenary. d) Using Socratic circles, analyse and discuss animal adaptations to different water availability in their environment. Make a write-up and present it in a class plenary. a) In pairs, search for and discuss: i) plant adaptations to varying water availability in their habitats. ii) techniques employed by humans to manage plants that survive in different environments. Create illustrations using a suitable computer program and present your work. Using the project-based learning method, investigate excretory products in plants (latex, anthocyanins, oils, quinine, and saponins) to discover their uses in everyday life;
