TOPIC 7 ***Inheritance and Evolution*** "90 PERIODS". Competency; The learner appreciates the transmission of traits from one generation to the next, and the mechanisms that drive change in a gene pool, by analysing the concepts of inheritance and evolution, so as to make informed decisions regarding inheritable conditions, for genetic engineering, conservation biology, and health. Learning Outcomes; The learner should be able to; a) analyse the structural and functional significance of nucleic acids in meiosis and mitosis, their role in cellular functions, and how mutations in nucleotide sequences can contribute to disease (cancer) (u, s, gs, v/a); b) assess gene technology techniques, their applications in various fields, and the associated ethical implications (u, s, gs, v/a); c) apply Mendelian principles to predict inheritance patterns and utilise mathematical models to analyse allele frequencies and genotype distributions within populations (u, s); d) examine different forms of allele interactions (autosomal linkage, multiple alleles, codominance and incomplete dominance), including their examples and influence on phenotypic expression (u, s, gs); e) analyse evolutionary advancements in key life processes (circulation, reproduction, gaseous exchange, coordination, movement, and excretion), as well as their suitability for survival across different species (u, s, gs, v/a); f) assess speciation and resistance, mechanisms driving them, and factors contributing to extinction events, through comparison of historical and contemporary examples (u, s, gs, v/a). a) In groups, search for and discuss 3D models of Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), Ribonucleic acid (RNA), and chromosome and base-pairing rules. Create 3D models and present your findings in a gallery walk. b) In groups, search for the properties of the genetic code. Make a write-up and present the findings to the class. c) In groups, watch animations or videos and make a write-up or roleplay: i) semi-conservative DNA replication. ii) protein synthesis. Present your findings to the class. d) In groups, search and discuss: i) mitosis and meiosis. ii) cancer causes risk factors, prevention, and management. Make a write-up that includes a mind map showing the relationship between cell division and cancer. a) visit any nearby facility specialising in genetic engineering to explore key techniques such as: i) Recombinant DNA Technology, ii) Gene Cloning, iii) and Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR). Make a report showing their application in genetically modified organisms (GMOs), synthetic insulin production, and vaccine development. b) In groups, hold a debate on the ethical, social, and environmental implications of gene technology, particularly GMOs. a) In groups search and use genetic crosses to demonstrate: i) Mendel’s 1st law using locally available materials. ii) Mendel’s 2nd law of inheritance. Make a write-up and present your findings to the class. b) watch animations or videos on meiosis, focusing on homologous chromosome segregation and independent assortment, and relate these processes to Mendel’s laws. Make a write-up and present your findings to the class. c) In pairs, search for the Hardy-Weinberg principle and factors that upset the genetic equilibrium. Make a write-up and present your findings to the class. a) In pairs, search for forms of allele interactions and their influence on phenotypic expression. Make a write-up and present it to the class. b) In pairs, carry out a scientific demonstration to show the 3:1 second filial generation dihybrid linkage ratio, using locally available materials. Make write-ups and present them to the class. a) Each group searches for and analyses evolutionary advancement in a particular life process i.e., circulation, reproduction, gaseous exchange, coordination, movement and excretion. Use visual aids to summarise your findings. In the gallery walk, discuss the significance of these advancements for the survival of living organisms in their environments. a) search for isolation mechanisms, speciation, and factors that contribute to extinction. Pair up to discuss and make a write-up to present to the class. b) In groups, use problem-based learning to analyse case studies of antimicrobial and pesticide resistance. Make a write-up, explaining the problems, causes and strategies to manage the challenges. Present your findings to the class. c) In groups, search for timelines of documented mass extinctions, highlighting key events, causes, and effects and the contribution of extinction to evolution. Using a suitable computer program, create infographics to show the findings and present them to the class;
