ACIDS, BASES AND ALKALIS
In everyday life, acids and bases play an important role in almost everything; from digestion of food to the function of the medicine we take and even to the cleaning products we use. Without acids and bases, many of the products in our homes today couldn’t be useful. Most vegetables contain bases and toothpaste is an example of an alkali used for brushing our teeth to neutralize the acid produced by bacteria that remain in the mouth.

ACIDS
An acid is a compound that dissolves in water to produce hydrogen ions (H+) as the only positively charged ions. It is the hydrogen ions that cause acidic properties. A hydrogen atom consists of a single proton and a single electron. The electron is lost when hydrogen ion is formed and thus a hydrogen ion is a proton.  Also, an acid can be defined as a proton donor (it provides protons or hydrogen ions to a base during the reaction). OH-(aq) + H+(aq) → H2O(l). Therefore, the base is a proton acceptor.
An acid can also be referred to as mineral or organic acid. Examples of mineral acids (common laboratory acids); Sulphuric acid, Nitric acid, Hydrochloric acid, Carbonic acid, Phosphoric acid, Phosphorous acid and Sulphurous acid. These are called mineral acids because they are derived from minerals. Examples of organic acids; Ethanoic acid (CH3COOOH) found in vines, tannic acid in tea, citric acid found in fruits, lactic acid found in sour milk, Oxalic acid (moss), Tartaric acid (baking powder) and Methanoic acid (wasps, bees). 

These are acids derived from organic compounds. They occur naturally.
Characteristics of an acid
	Acids have a sharp sour taste
	Acids are electrolytes because in solutions, they are ionic and therefore conduct electricity.
	If concentrated, they can be corrosive.
	Acids change colors of indicators e.g., turn blue litmus paper red. NB// Acids have no effect on red litmus paper.
	Acids ionize in water to produce hydrogen ions.
Sulphuric acid: H2SO4(aq) →     
Hydrochloric acid: HCl(aq) →     
	Acids react with reactive metals to liberate hydrogen gas and a salt is formed. The hydrogen ions may be replaced directly or indirectly by a metal.
Acid + Reactive metal       →       Salt + Hydrogen gas
H2SO4(aq) + Mg(s) →    
Reactive metals such as potassium or sodium or calcium can’t be used as they react violently with dilute acids, making the reaction dangerous to perform. The reactions are fast, explosive and produce a lot of heat energy which may break the apparatus.
All metals which are considerably more electropositive than hydrogen (refer to activity series) react with acids to liberate hydrogen which they displace directly from the acids. Metals that are below hydrogen in the electrochemical series will not liberate hydrogen from acids.
Note: Lead does not liberate hydrogen gas with dilute acids. Lead being only slightly more electropositive than hydrogen, liberates hydrogen with only hot concentrated acids.
Note: When Iron reacts with an acid, Iron (II) salts, not Iron (III) salts are formed because the more stable oxidation state of Iron is +2
Fe(s) + 2HCl(aq) →  
Note: Iron fillings are greasy and don’t react easily. The grease is removed before use by stirring with ethanol or methylated spirit for several minutes. It is then filtered and dried.
Generally, Metals higher than lead and lower than calcium in the reactivity series can be used to prepare salts on reaction with acids. The acid used is usually gently warmed to increase the rate of reaction. For the reaction between zinc and dilute HCl, CuSO4 is used as a catalyst since the reaction is so slow at room temperature. 
Note: Nitrates cannot be prepared using this method because dilute nitric acid being an oxidizing agent, does not react with metals to liberate hydrogen gas expect magnesium. Nitric acid liberates hydrogen with magnesium only when the acid is very dilute.
Mg(s) + 2HNO3(aq) →
Note: When a piece of Aluminium foil is placed in a test-tube containing cold dilute hydrochloric acid or sulphuric acid, no reaction occurs. This is due to the presence of a thin, protective layer of aluminium oxide which is formed as soon as the metal is exposed to air, which prevents any reaction. If a piece of the foil is placed in a test-tube containing warm acid, a reaction occurs after a short while. This is because; the oxide layer dissolves in the warm acid exposing the metal which reacts with the acid.
2Al(s) + 6HCl(aq) →
2Al(s) + 3H2SO4(aq) →
	Acids react with carbonates and hydrogen carbonates to liberate carbon dioxide gas and a salt and water are formed.
Acid + Carbonate/Hydrogen carbonate       →      Salt + Water + Carbon dioxide gas            
2HCl(aq) + ZnCO3(s) →     
H2SO4(aq) + 2KHCO3(s) →     
NB// 1. Sulphuric acid does not react with calcium carbonate and barium carbonate.
         2. Aluminium carbonate doesn’t exist.
	Acids react with bases to form salt and water only.
This reaction is called a neutralization reaction. This is because the resulting solution is neutral (i.e., neither acidic nor alkaline). Essentially neutralization takes place when a hydroxide ion reacts with a hydrogen ion to form a water molecule (H2O).
Acid + Base (metal oxide or hydroxide) →     Salt + Water
NaOH(aq) + HCl(aq) →     	
H2SO4(aq) + PbO(s) →    
	Acids react with sulphites readily to form bubbles of colourless sulphur dioxide, which has a pungent, irritating smell.
Na2SO3(s) + H2SO4(aq) → Na2SO4(aq) + H2O(l) + SO2(g)
Preparation of acids
	By the reaction between an acid anhydride (an oxide of a non-metal) and water.
Nitrogen dioxide + water→     
NO2(g) + H2O(l) →     
	By displacing a weaker acid (more volatile acid) from its salt by a stronger acid (less volatile acid).
2NaCl(aq) + H2SO4(aq) →     
	By precipitating an insoluble sulphide from a metallic salt by hydrogen sulphide.
Pb(CH3COO)2(aq) + H2S(g) →     
Lead ethanoate                      
Concentration of acids
An acid can either be dilute or concentrated.
1)  Dilute acid. This is one which contains a large amount of water and very small quantity of the acid.
2)  Concentrated acid. This contains a very large amount of acid dissolved in a little amount of water.
Strength of acids
Strength of an acid refers to the ease with which an acid ionizes to produce hydrogen ions. On this basis, acids are of two types; 
1)  Strong acids. They are acids which when dissolved in water dissociate/ionize completely to produce free hydrogen ions, that is, the solution contains a high concentration of hydrogen ions.
NB//. Dissociation/ionization is the breakdown of a substance into particles which are capable of moving freely in solution.
Examples of strong acids include; Sulphuric acid, Nitric acid and Hydrochloric acid.
Sulphuric acid:     H2SO4(aq)→
2)  Weak acids. They partially dissociate/ionize in water.
Examples include; Carbonic acid, Phosphoric acid, Sulphurous acid, Methanoic acid and Ethanoic acid
Ethanoic acid:   CH3COOH(aq) ⇋
Sulphurous acid:      H2SO3(aq)  ⇋   2H+(aq)  + SO32-(aq) 
NB//. ⇋ means partial/incomplete reaction and the reaction is reversible.

Basicity of an acid
This is the number of hydrogen ions produced by one molecule of an acid when dissolved in water. NB//. Basicity is not always equal to the number of hydrogen ions in one molecule of the acid e.g., the basicity of Ethanoic acid is one (monobasic) yet it has four hydrogen ions, three of which cannot be replaced.
Some acids produce 2, 3 or more hydrogen ions per molecule.
Types of basicity
(a) Monobasic acid. It is an acid which dissociates to produce only one hydrogen ion when dissolved in water. The acid is said to have a basicity of one e.g., Hydrochloric acid, Nitric acid and Ethanoic acid
Hydrochloric acid: HCl(aq) →
Ethanoic acid: CH3COOH(aq) →
Methanoic acid: HCOOH(aq) →
(b) Dibasic acid. It is an acid which ionizes to produce only two hydrogen ions from its molecule when dissolved in water. The basicity of this acid is two. E.g., Sulphuric acid and Carbonic acid
Carbonic acid:    H2CO3(aq) →
(c) Tribasic acid. This is an acid which dissociates to produce only three hydrogen ions when dissolved in water. E.g., Phosphoric acid
Phosphoric acid:   H3PO4(aq) →
Uses of acids
	Sulphuric acid is used in car batteries.
	Nitric acid is used in the manufacture of dyes, explosives and fertilizers.
	Hydrochloric acid is used in pickling metals.
	Ethanoic acid is used in seasoning of food salads / Ethanoic acid is used in the preservation of fruits and vegetables.
	Sulphuric acid is used in the manufacture of plastics, soap, detergents and paints.
	Hydrochloric acid in the stomach of human being helps in the digestion of food.
	Acids are used in the manufacture of fertilizers e.g., sulphuric acid.
	Ascorbic acid in fruits is useful to our bodies.

BASES AND ALKALIS
A base is a substance which reacts with an acid to form a salt and water only. In general terms, bases are oxides or hydroxides of metals / an ammonium group. Examples include copper(II)oxide, CuO; zinc oxide, ZnO; calcium oxide, CaO; magnesium oxide, MgO; or hydroxides of metals and ammonium groups like sodium hydroxide, NaOH; potassium hydroxide, KOH; calcium hydroxide, Ca(OH)2 and ammonium hydroxide, NH4OH. 
Base (metal oxide or hydroxide) + Acid →     Salt + Water
NH4OH(aq) + HCl(aq) →
NB//.If a solid compound dissolves in water, it implies that the water has caused the solid to split into ions.
ALKALIS
An alkali is a base which dissolves in water to give hydroxide ions as the only negatively charged ions. An alkali contains a high concentration of hydroxide ions in a solution. Therefore, all alkalis are bases, but not all bases are alkalis. A solution of a base in water is called an alkaline solution. A solution in which water is a solvent is called an aqueous solution. Examples of alkalis include: sodium hydroxide or caustic soda, potassium hydroxide or caustic potash, calcium hydroxide or lime water, barium hydroxide and ammonium hydroxide or aqueous ammonia. All oxides and the rest of the hydroxides are not alkalis e.g., magnesium hydroxide, copper (II) hydroxide because they insoluble in water.
Properties of bases (alkalis)
	Their solutions are soapy and feel greasy / slippery.
	Their solutions are bitter.
	Their solutions turn red litmus paper to blue.
	They react with acids to form salt and water.
	Alkalis react with ammonium salts when heated to produce ammonia gas, which has a chocking smell and turns red litmus blue
NH4Cl(aq) + NaOH(aq)                     NaCl(aq) + H2O(l) + NH3(g)

	Alkalis precipitate many insoluble metal hydroxides from solutions of their salts.
2NaOH(aq) + Pb(NO3)2(aq)                       Pb(OH)2(s) + 2NaNO3(aq)
	Sodium hydroxide and potassium hydroxide are deliquescent.
Sodium hydroxide solution absorbs carbon dioxide from air to form white powder of sodium carbonate.
NaOH(aq) + CO2(g)                     H2O(l) +Na2CO3(aq)
Preparation of bases	
	By burning metals in air
2Mg(s) + O2(g) →  2MgO(s)
	Addition of water to metal or metal oxide
Na(s) + H2O(l)   →   NaOH(aq)  +  H2(g)
CaO(s) +H2O(l) →  Ca(OH)2 (aq)
	Heating the hydroxide, carbonate or nitrates of metals except sodium and potassium
	Cu(OH)2(s)               CuO(s)  + H2O(l)
	CaCO3(s)                  CaO(s)  + CaO(s)  + CO2(g)
	2Pb(NO3)2(s)             2PbO(s)   + 4NO2(g)  +  O2(g)
Strength of a base / alkali
This is the ease with which a base/ alkali dissociates or ionizes. Alkalis are said to be weak or strong.
1) Weak base /alkali. This is a base / alkali which partially dissociates or ionizes in aqueous solution e.g., ammonia solution. It’s characterized by reversible ionization. A weak base / alkali has low conductivity of electricity.
NH4OH(aq) ⇋	
2) Strong base / alkali. A strong base / alkali is one which completely dissociates or ionizes in aqueous solution e.g., sodium hydroxide, potassium hydroxide and calcium hydroxide. Calcium hydroxide is slightly soluble in water but since it is completely ionized, it is a strong alkali. Strong bases / alkalis are very good conductors of electricity.
Na0H(aq) →
Uses of alkalis and bases
	Sodium hydroxide and potassium hydroxide are used in the manufacture of soap.
Calcium oxide is used:
	In building industry as slaked lime, in mortar and plaster. 
	In the manufacturing of bleaching powder.
	And as a drying agent to dry ammonia and ethanol.
	Magnesium hydroxide is used as an acid to neutralize acidity in the stomach.
INDICATORS (ACID-BASE INDICATORS)
An indicator is a substance which shows whether a solution is acidic, alkaline or neutral. The color change of the indicator depends on the strength of the acid or the base. Some examples of indicators used in chemistry experiments include: Litmus paper; Methyl orange; Bromothymol blue; Bromothymol red; Phenolphthalein; Universal indicators etc.
Common examples of indicators include;
Indicators	Colour in acid	Colour in base
Methyl orange
	Red

	Yellow


Phenolphthalein	Colourless
	Pink
Methyl red	Red
	Yellow
Litmus paper
	Red
	Blue

Bromothymol red	Red	Blue
Litmus solution	Red	Blue
Universal indicator		

Indicator	Color in acidic solution	Color in neutral solution	Color in alkaline solution
Litmus	Red	Purple	Blue
Methyl orange	Pink	Orange	Yellow
Phenolphthalein	Colorless	Colorless	Pink


NB:  Weak acids turn litmus pink
NB//. Hydroxide ions are responsible for the change of color of litmus paper from red to blue while hydrogen ions are responsible for the change of blue litmus paper to red
Preparation of indicators in the laboratory from flowers of red cabbage
In the laboratory, indicators can be obtained from plant extracts especially brightly colored flowers such as hibiscus and morning glory / red cabbage. The procedure is as follows;
	Collect a handful of brightly coloured flowers e.g., hibiscus or red cabbage and using a mortar, crash the flowers thoroughly into a paste and add a little ethanol to the paste. NB: Use only one type of flowers and do not mix them.
	Stir the solution well with a pestle and then filter the solution into a boiling tube. Carefully decant the mixture and keep the colored solution in a test tube. This solution (filtrate) obtained is the indicator.
	Record the color of the filtrate. (Which type of indicator is this?) 
	Add the made indicator to various acidic solutions, water and alkaline solutions.
	The color of the plant extract changes when it is in an acid or in a base. Different plant extracts produce different colors, but each, can be used to identify whether a solution is acidic or basic. It is for this reason, that the extract is called an indicator.
NB//. Ethanol is used as a solvent because indicators are insoluble in water but soluble in ethanol which is a non-polar solvent. Therefore, the indicator obtained can be used to test for the acidity and alkalinity of different solutions.
Universal indicator
This is mixture of other simple indicators in solution. It enables us to classify solutions into neutral, alkaline and acidic. Universal indicator is the most useful indicator. It shows the extent of alkalinity or acidity (i.e., in addition to showing whether a solution is acidic or alkaline, it shows whether the acid is weak or strong).
The indicator may be available in solution or paper form. If in solution form, add 2 or 3 drops of universal indicator to test the various solutions. Match the color change of the solution to the corresponding color on the universal indicator PH chart. Record the color change and the PH value.
pH and pH Scale
pH refers to the degree of alkalinity or acidity of a solution. The pH of a solution is a number which shows the acidic or basic strength of the solution. It can also be defined as the negative logarithm (to base ten) of hydrogen ion concentration. A pH meter classifies solutions as alkaline, acidic or neutral. On a pH meter, the scale ranges from 0-14 as shown below. 
 The universal indicator PH scale
pH
	0   1     2     3
	4    5
	6
	7
	8     9
	10    11
	12    13   14

Colour 	Red	Orange	Yellow	Green	Blue	Indigo	Violet
Strength 	Strong acid	Weak acid	Neutral 	Weak alkali 	Strong alkali

	Acidic solutions have pH of less than 7.
	Alkaline solutions have high pH i.e., greater than 7.
	Neutral solutions have pH of 7.
(i)  Strongly acidic. This is a solution with the lowest pH value i.e., 0-3. (ii) Weakly acidic. A solution with slightly higher pH value i.e., 4-6.9
(iii)Strongly alkaline (basic). This is a solution with the highest pH value i.e., 10 – 14.
(iv)Weakly alkaline. This is a solution with pH value just above 7 i.e., 7.1 to 9.9
NB: When distilled water is added to an alkaline solution, the pH value decreases towards 7, the solution becomes less alkaline
The pH values of some common solutions
Hydrochloric acid; 0.0, Gastric juices; 1.0, Lemon juice; 2.5, Vinegar; 3.0, Wine; 3.5, Tomato juice; 4.1, Black coffee; 5.0, Acid rain; 5.6, Urine; 6.0, Rain Water; 6.5, Milk; 6.5, Pure water; 7.0, Blood; 7.4, Baking soda; 8.5, Toothpaste; 9.0, Borax solution	; 9.2, Milk of Magnesia; 10.5, Limewater; 11.0, Ammonia; 12.0 and Sodium hydroxide; 14.0
Measurements of soil pH using a pH paper strip
To about 10 g of the obtained soil samples, add 100 ml of distilled water. Thorough stirring is done to form a mixture that is left to stand for 5 minutes. After 5 minutes, a pH paper strip is dipped into the supernatant and the obtained colour matched with those on the colour chart on the back of the paper strips to determine the pH
Significance of pH measurements
	In the soap industry, it is important to know that the final product (soap solution) is neutral, that is, it must have a pH of seven.
	Soils which are too acidic are harmful in agriculture. This information is obtained by measuring the pH of the soil. Neutralization of excess acid is carried out by adding slaked lime (calcium hydroxide) to the soil.
	Various drugs are prepared at given pHs which must be determined.
Application of neutralization reactions
	Soil Treatment (Control of soil pH). The majority of plants grow best at pH 7. If the soil is acidic or alkaline the plant may grow badly. Therefore, chemicals can be added to the soil to change its pH. If the soil is too acidic - the most common complaint - it is treated with a base (chemicals opposite to an acid) in order to neutralize it. Common treatments use quicklime (calcium oxide) or chalk (calcium carbonate).
	Indigestion. We all have hydrochloric acid in our stomach - it helps breakdown food! However, too much acid leads to indigestion. Therefore, to cure this ailment we need to neutralize the acid with a base such as, sodium hydrogen carbonate (baking soda), or an indigestion tablet (antacid tablet)
	Curing insect stings and ant bites. A bee sting contains an acid. In order to relieve the painful symptoms of the sting we need to neutralize the acid. By rubbing on calamine lotion (zinc carbonate) or baking soda, the acid can be neutralized. Wasp stings are alkaline; hence acid is needed to neutralize and remove the painful sting. Vinegar (ethanoic acid) is used.
	Waste water treatment










