TOPIC 1 ***Cell Biology*** "90 PERIODS". Competency; The learner evaluates cells and tissues, by analysing and relating their structure to function, as a basis for medical research in order to improve health. Learning Outcomes; The learner should be able to; a) analyse the properties and functions of chemical compounds (water, lipids, proteins including enzymes from mammals) in a cell, focusing on their roles in maintaining cellular structure and metabolic processes in living organisms (s, gs); (Thermal properties of water not required); b) operate a light microscope to observe tissues from plants and animals under different magnifications (s, gs); c) analyse the ultrastructure of animal/plant cells, bacterial cells, and the plasma membrane, to distinguish prokaryotic and eukaryotic cell characteristics (s, gs); d) analyse the structures of plant (parenchyma, collenchyma, sclerenchyma, xylem, and phloem) and animal (epithelial, cardiac, areolar, fibrous, and skeletal) tissues to assess their roles in physiological processes, disease diagnosis, and levels of organisation (u, s, v/a, gs). a) In groups, search for and discuss: i) interaction of water with polar and non-polar substances. ii) simple and conjugated lipids, their properties, and functions. iii) structural categories of proteins, their properties, and functions. Create audio-visual presentations and share them with other groups. b) Using modelling or dramatisation, discuss: i) the mechanisms of enzyme action (Lock and key, induced fit hypothesis). ii) the different types of enzyme inhibition. Make a write-up and present it to the class in a plenary. c) In groups, dissect a small mammal and extract structures that contain enzymes. Design and carry out scientific investigations on enzyme substrate specificity, effects of inhibitors, substrate, and enzyme concentrations on enzyme-controlled reactions, and write a scientific report. In pairs, prepare slides, observe under low and medium power, and determine the linear magnification of the cells observed. Make a write-up and present findings to the class in a plenary. a) In groups: i) study and compare images of ultra-structures of animal or plant cells with a bacterium cell, and make diagrams using a suitable graphics program. ii) study images of the fluidmosaic model of the plasma membrane, make a model and use it to explain the functions of the membrane and its parts. Make a write-up and present the findings to the class. b) search and categorise the cells as prokaryotic and eukaryotic and present your work to the rest of the groups. c) search for the differences in the ultrastructure of prokaryotes, design an annotated flow diagram, and use it to explain the division of the original kingdom Monera to kingdoms eubacteria and archaebacteria. a) In groups: i) observe and discuss micrographs, images, prepared slides, or prepared slides of plant tissues, epithelial tissues, and connective tissues. ii) relate the structure and location of the tissues to their functions. Make a write-up with labelled drawings and present it to the class. b) In pairs, conduct an investigation to compare micrographs of healthy tissues from the internal organs (liver, lungs, heart, or intestines) of a mammal, with images of micrographs of diseased tissues from the same organs. Make a report and present the findings to the class. c) hold a debate titled “Organisms at the organ level are more efficient than those at the cellular and tissue level”;
