TOPIC 4 ***Respiration*** "30 PERIODS". Competency; The learner appreciates how living organisms generate cellular energy, by analysing respiratory processes and the chemical breakdown of food within cells, to make informed decisions that promote good health and wellbeing. Learning Outcomes; The learner should be able to; a) examine the relationship between the structure of the mitochondrion and the stages of cellular respiration in living organisms (u, s); b) analyse the biochemical processes leading to ATP production in living organisms, and how these processes are affected by physical activities and respiratory poisons (cyanide) (u, s, gs, v/a). a) In groups, study images of the ultrastructure of a mitochondrion, make drawings, and share them in a class plenary. b) individually search for and discuss the structural relationship of the mitochondrion to its functions and hydrolysis of Adenosine triphosphate (ATP) to release energy. Using concept mapping, present your work in a class plenary (Details of biochemistry are not required). a) In groups, use simulations that demonstrate the process of glycolysis, focusing on its stages, key molecules involved, and its significance in cellular respiration. Make a write-up and present it to the class plenary. b) Using the jigsaw strategy, discuss the role of acetyl coenzyme A (acetyl-CoA) in the metabolism of carbohydrates, lipids, and proteins. Each group creates a summary chart showing the integration of these pathways through acetyl-CoA and presents it to the class. c) In groups, search for the citric acid cycle, focusing on key steps (substrate-level phosphorylation, decarboxylation, and the production of NADH and FADH₂). Groups then engage in a hands-on activity, such as constructing a flowchart, to visualise the cycle and present it in class. d) In groups, search for oxidative phosphorylation in the mitochondrion. watch a video clip or roleplay the events of electron transport focusing on the role of protein complexes, NADH, FADH2, and oxygen. Make a write-up and present. e) search for or watch an animation explaining how cyanide disrupts the electron transport system. Then pair up to share and present your findings. f) In groups, search for how ATP production changes during various exercise intensities. Make write-ups and use gallery walks to discuss your findings;
