TOPIC 6 ***Coordination*** "90 PERIODS". Competency; The learner assesses the physiological and behavioural processes during organisms’ responses to internal and external stimuli, in order to appreciate the adaptive behaviour of organisms and, therefore, promote their welfare to ensure survival and reproductive success. Learning Outcomes; The learner should be able to; a) examine the role of plant hormones in tropisms, photoperiodism, and the application of these processes in agricultural practices (u, s, gs, v/a); b) analyse impulse transmission in relation to the structure of a neurone, a chemical synapse, and the factors that influence neural activity in response to environmental stimuli (u, gs, v/a); c) examine the properties and functions of sensory receptors, the role of the retina in visual perception, and the ear’s organs of balance in relation to their response to environmental stimuli (u, s, gs, v/a); d) examine the adaptive significance of diverse animal behaviour in promoting survival and reproductive success (u, s, gs, v/a). a) In groups, design and carry out scientific investigations on: i) phototropism. ii) geotropism. Each group writes a report that includes the ecological and agricultural significance of these responses. b) In pairs, search for and discuss the role played by Gibberellins, cytokinins, Abscisic Acid, and Ethylene to regulate growth and their commercial applications. Summarise findings and present them to the class. c) carry out a scientific investigation on the effect of ethylene on raw fruits. Write a report and present your findings. d) search for/visit a floriculture farm to find out: i) effect of the change in day length on plant flowering. ii) application of changes in day length in floriculture. Make a write-up and present it in a class plenary. a) Individually, search for the structure of a neurone to identify the relationship between the parts and their function. Make annotated illustrations and present them to the class. b) In groups watch a simulation/video clip on: i) Impulse transmission under varying stimulations. ii) factors affecting impulse transmission speed. Analyse data on impulse transmission and explain the significance of warmups before physical activity and the use of cold packs in first aid. Make a write-up and present the findings to the class. c) In groups, watch videos or animations on nervous transmission at a chemical synapse. Make a write-up: i) describing inhibitory and excitatory synapses. ii) explaining the role of local anaesthetics. a) In groups, search for and discuss the types of sensory receptors and the stimuli, delving into receptor properties. Make a write-up of your findings and present it to the class. b) In groups, search for and discuss the structure of the retina and the distribution of photoreceptor cells. Make a write-up and present findings to the class. c) watch videos or animations illustrating the ear’s role in maintaining balance during position and movement. Make a write-up and present your findings to the class. In groups, carry out a field excursion and observe and analyse innate and learned behaviour. Make a write-up of the significance of each type of behaviour, focusing on survival and reproduction. Present to the class;
