TOPIC 9 ***Ecology*** "90 PERIODS". Competency; The learner evaluates the interactions within ecosystems by analysing data and personal experiences to develop strategies for enhancing food security and promoting sustainable management of natural resources. Learning Outcomes; The learner should be able to; a) Analyse population dynamics and the factors affecting them in different ecosystems (u, s, gs, v/a); b) Analyse the processes of ecological succession and strategies for effective ecological restoration practices in diverse environments; c) examine the concept of energy flow through ecosystems, its role in maintaining ecosystem stability, and the impact of human activities on energy flow (u, s); d) explain the concept of carbon footprint in relation to climate change, including its measurement, as well as the role of carbon sequestration in mitigating climate change (u, gs, v/a); e) examine the impact of invasive species on native biodiversity, ecosystems, and economies, as well as strategies for their management and control (u, s, gs, v/a); f) analyse the concept of food security, focusing on its components and sustainable agricultural practices to address its challenges (u, s, gs, v/a). a) In pairs, search for and discuss the following population dynamics in different ecosystems: i) population characteristics. ii) population growth. iii) factors affecting population density. Make a write-up and present your findings to the class. b) In groups, conduct field studies to estimate population density using quadrats and capture-recapture techniques in different ecosystems. Make a report and present it to the class. a) In pairs, search for and discuss: i) The role of primary and secondary succession in preserving biodiversity. ii) techniques and benefits for restoring degraded ecosystems. Make a write-up and present your findings to the class. b) In groups, plan, design and implement a small-scale restoration project on a degraded area within or around the school. Make a project report and present to the rest of the class. a) In groups, search for and discuss: i) the concept of energy flow in the ecosystem. ii) effect of human activities on energy flow. Use a suitable computer program to illustrate energy flow in the ecosystem and present it to the class. In groups, search for and discuss: i) Bio-accumulation, biomagnification, and feed conversion ratio, their importance and relationship to energy transfer/flow. ii) Significance of bioaccumulation and biomagnification to the health of organisms and the environment in an ecosystem. iii) Applications of feed conversion ratios. carry out a scientific investigation on feed conversion ratio in a small mammal (rat or rabbit) using different diets. Write a report and present it to the class in a plenary. a) In pairs, search for and discuss: i) the concept of carbon footprint and its measurement. ii) activities that contribute to carbon output and key sources of greenhouse gas emissions. Use ICT tools to present findings. b) Using problem-based learning method, analyse terrestrial or aquatic invasive species case study to find the: i) characteristics of invasive species ii) their impacts on native biodiversity, ecosystems, and economies. iii) strategies to manage and control the invasive species. Each group writes a report to present their findings. c) Using problem-based learning method, examine a case study of a pest infestation controlled using biological agents. Each group makes a write-up and presents to the class. a) In groups, search for and discuss: i) components of food security; availability, access, utilisation, and stability. ii) their roles in maintaining a stable food supply. iii) threats and solutions to food security. Make a write-up and use ICT tools to present the findings;
