Water is a chemical compound consisting of oxygen and hydrogen in the ratio of 2:1. Its chemical formula is H₂O. Water is a liquid of fundamental importance to all kinds of plants and animals. Every living organism needs water to survive thus the slogan, “water is life”. Is pure water acidic?;
Water has biological uses. All biological processes in living organisms require water as a medium for the reactions. For example, photosynthesis, excretion, transport of materials and transmission of impulses. Is it true that water is one of the raw materials of photosynthesis?;
In addition to the biological uses of water, it can be used for domestic use, farm use, industrial use and as a habitat for aquatic organisms such as fish, crocodiles and water lilies. In industries, it is used as a solvent, for cleaning, for cooling purposes especially in power stations, used in steam engines, generating hydroelectricity, transportation using boats, ships, etc., and for recreation purposes and construction. Does pure water exist in a natural state?;
Pure water does not exist in a natural state, but supplies of water are obtainable all over the world. Water constitutes about 67% of the earth’s surface and occurs in rocks, the atmosphere and in all living organisms. Is it true that the ice caps, rain, wells and springs, rivers and lakes plus the seas and oceans, are all natural sources of water?;
In spite of the fact that a lot of water is used daily domestically, industrially and in irrigation, the amount of water on earth remains fairly constant. Water keeps on changing from one state to another depending on the conditions of the environment. A cycle is a number of changes which go back to the starting point and which can be repeated. The water cycle is the process by which water circulates round the earth. Could the driving force of the water cycle be rain?;
The driving force for the water cycle is the sun. Water vapour forms in the air when the sun shines and when wind blows across water. Water vapour in the atmosphere may also result from transpiration processes in plants and respiration processes of all living organisms and burning of starchy food materials forming carbon dioxide and water which are expelled into the atmosphere. Water vapour rises since it is less dense than air. As it rises, it cools. Finally, it is so cold that the vapour condenses forming tiny drops of liquid water. These drops float in the sky and form a cloud. The tiny drops of water in a cloud join together and fall to the ground as rain. The rain water passes into springs, rivers and seas. Once again it evaporates. Water on earth’s surface is always changing into vapour, going into the air and then falling as rain. Are these steps of the water cycle, right?;
Pure water is a clear, colourless and odourless liquid at room temperature. It is neutral to litmus. At a pressure of 760mmHg, water freezes at 0⁰C. At a pressure of 760mmHg, water boils at 100⁰C at sea level. It boils away completely and does not leave any residue. Water has a density of 1gcm⁻³ at 4⁰C. Water is an excellent solvent. It dissolves practically everything. It is often called a universal solvent. Is water a non-polar solvent?;
Water can be tested chemically in two ways: By using white anhydrous copper II sulphate which turns blue or by using blue cobalt II chloride paper. Is it true that water turns blue cobalt II chloride paper pink?;
The reactivity of metals with water is not the same. Some metals react very fast with water while others react very slowly with water. The reaction varies from metal to metal depending on the position of the metal in the reactivity series. Is it true that most reactive metals react with water forming a metal hydroxide and oxygen gas is liberated?;
Potassium reacts vigorously with cold water, catches fire and burns with a purple/lilac flame. It floats, melts into a silvery ball and darts/moves rapidly on the surface of water with a hissing sound and gives off hydrogen gas to form sodium hydroxide solution which turns red litmus blue. It is the intense heat produced that causes potassium to melt, because of its low melting point. Does it explode with a pop sound as it disappears?;
Sodium reacts vigorously with water. When a piece of sodium is placed in cold water, it floats, melts into a silvery ball and darts on the surface of water with a hissing sound. The sodium gradually becomes smaller and smaller as it reacts with water to produce an alkaline solution of sodium hydroxide. Is the hissing sound due to evolution of a colourless gas that relights a glowing splint?; 
Unlike potassium, sodium usually doesn’t burn when reacting with water, however, if its movement on water is restricted, it burns with a yellow flame. Sodium and Potassium are very reactive elements. For this reason, they are stored under oil to prevent them from coming into contact with air. Is potassium more reactive than sodium?;
Calcium reacts steadily with water. When a small piece of calcium is dropped in water, it sinks and reacts quietly to form bubbles of hydrogen gas and an alkaline solution that turns red litmus paper blue. The water becomes milky or cloudy because the calcium hydroxide formed is not very soluble in water. Is calcium hydroxide also called quick lime?;
Magnesium sinks to the bottom and reacts very slowly with cold water to produce very few bubbles of hydrogen gas on the surface of the metal and an alkaline solution of magnesium hydroxide. However, hot magnesium reacts rapidly with steam, burning with a bright white flame, leaving white ash of magnesium oxide. Is it true that much heat is evolved and the hydrogen gas produced may burn with a blue flame in air?;
For a reaction between magnesium and steam, a clean piece of magnesium ribbon must be used. The boiling tube is first heated to drive out all air/oxygen. The cotton wool soaked in water is heated to release steam that reacts with the heated magnesium ribbon. Figure239.1.8.water_image_003.jpg. Does the hot magnesium catch fire in steam and burn brightly to form magnesium hydroxide?;
Aluminium does not react with water or steam due to the formation of an insoluble oxide layer which prevents contact between water and the metal inhibiting any further reaction. Therefore, the Aluminium foil is first cleaned to remove a coating of oxide film and then reacted with steam at red heat. A colourless gas is given off and a white coating is formed on the foil. Could the white coating be an amphoteric oxide?; 
Zinc reacts only when heated strongly in steam forming a solid that is yellow when hot and white when cold and hydrogen gas. Is this solid, a basic oxide?; 
Steam reacts slowly with heated iron to form tri-iron tetra oxide, a blue-black solid. This reaction is reversible and thus can be made to proceed in the reverse direction by passing excess hydrogen over heated tri-iron tetra oxide. Is it true that elements below Iron in the reactivity series do not react with either cold water or even steam?;
Water reacts with some metallic oxides, the basic oxides, to form alkaline solutions. Potassium and Sodium oxides react with water to form potassium hydroxide solution and sodium hydroxide solution respectively. Are the two hydroxides, amphoteric in nature?;
Calcium oxide is slightly soluble in water. However, when a few drops of water are added to a piece of calcium oxide at a time, for a little while nothing is observed, water vapour is given off with a hissing sound. The oxide begins to expand, it cracks and finally crumbles to a powder of calcium hydroxide. Is calcium hydroxide aslo known as lime water?;
Magnesium oxide dissolves slightly in water to form magnesium hydroxide solution. Metallic oxides of all metals below magnesium in the reactivity series are insoluble in water. With non-metallic oxides, water forms acidic solutions. Are non-metallic oxides, basic in nature?;
For us to make the best use of water from the various sources, we must learn to use the water sparingly and also keep it clean. Power stations that use river water for cooling for example, shouldn’t dump the water back in the river when it is still hot, since solubility of gases in water decreases with increase in temperature. Warm water from these power stations decreases the solubility of river oxygen content in the water, affecting aquatic life that is dependent on the oxygen. Is it true that when undesirable materials enter water, the water becomes unsuitable for some purposes and such water is said to be polluted?;
Pollution is the presence in or introduction into the environment of a substance which has harmful effects to plant and animal life. Substances which bring about pollution are called pollutants. Water pollution is the discharge of unwanted materials or substances into water bodies. Hillary says that carbon dioxide is not a water pollutant. Could he be right?; 
Common water pollutants include industrial wastes e.g., oils, and gases such as sulphur dioxide that dissolve and are washed by rain into water systems. These wastes change the pH of water affecting its quality in terms of taste, colour and smell. By laws should be made that protect water bodies. Is carbon dioxide, one of the gases that cause acid rain?; 
Common water pollutants include agricultural wastes e.g., herbicides, insecticides and fertilizers that are washed down the streams. These wastes change the pH of water and the phosphates and nitrates contained in them, aid the growth of algal blooms. The use of inorganic herbicides, insecticides and fertilizers should be minimised. Is it true that a herbicide is not a type of pesticide?; 
Common water pollutants include sewage, mainly from homes and factories which find their way into water systems. Sewage containing excreta breeds germs that cause diseases like cholera, diarrhoea and typhoid. The community should be sensitised on the proper disposal of excreta. Is it true that the distance between the toilet and water sources should be atleast 30m?;
Common water pollutants include soapless detergents and waste soapy dtergents, in homes, saloons and laundries, that may escape into water bodies and have an impact on life in water. The community should be sensitised on the proper disposal of water pollutants. Are all detergents currently available on the market in 2024, biodegradable?;
Water treatment or Water purification is the removal of harmful substances from water, making it suitable for domestic use. In Uganda, the treatment of water is done by Uganda National Water and Sewage Co-operation, UNWSC. Are the following stages in the process of water treatment properly arranged. Screening, addition of chemicals/neutralisation and sedimentation, filtration, chlorination and fluoridation?;
In the process of water treatment, the first step of screening involves the use of screens or wire mesh to remove large floating objects from water. Chemicals are then added to the water to remove harmful substances and neutralize acids and bases. The chemicals as well remove hardness of water, precipitate metals and cause suspended solid particles to settle. Sedimentation in particular, involves the clustering together of suspended particles into big lumps which sink and settle at the bottom. Alum/potassium Aluminium sulphate which has the ability to cluster particles is added in controlled quantities. Is chlorination and fluoridation the next step after neutralisation and sedimentation?; 
In the process of water treatment, after screening, neutralisation and sedimentation, is filtration. Filtration involves the removal of suspended particles in water by use of gravel and sand. The last part of the filter bed consists of gravel and sand, which serve as physical filtration media, along with some beneficial microbes that aid in biological filtration by breaking down organic matter and further removing harmful bacteria. Is chlorination and fluoridation the next step after filtration?; 
In the process of water treatment, after screening, neutralisation and sedimentation, and filtration, is chlorination and fluoridation. This involves addition of minute quantities of chlorine water or fluorine. This destroys bacteria but is harmless to humans. Only a small concentration of chlorine is used because it is harmful. However, in swimming pools, a high concentration of chlorine is used as the water may contain a high bacteria concentration. Water treated with a high concentration of chlorine is not meant for drinking. Hellen says that in some countries, ozone is used instead of chlorine. Could she be wrong?;
In the process of water treatment, addition of chlorine to water lowers its pH. Can soda ash/Na₂CO₃ be added to normalize the PH of the chlorinated water?;
Sewage is water containing waste matter from toilets, bathrooms, sinks, factories and streets of towns. The sewage is normally carried away by underground pipes into prepared areas for treatment. The reason for treating sewage is to remove harmful pollutants before allowing it to join water bodies. Do all companies and institutions have the same procedures for treating sewage?;
In the wastewater treatment process, incoming wastewater first enters a primary settlement tank. Through sieving and sedimentation, solid wastes sink to the bottom and are sent to an anaerobic digester where anaerobic bacteria digest the sludge, producing methane gas. The digested sludge is sent to an aeration tank along with liquid from the top of the primary settlement tank. Aerobic microorganisms in the aeration tank, further decompose any remaining organic matter, aided by bubbling air. Subsequently, the mixture undergoes secondary settlement in another tank, allowing activated sludge to settle out, which is then recycled back to the aeration tank. The clear liquid at the top of this secondary tank, termed effluent, devoid of odour and pathogens, is considered treated water and is discharged into rivers or lakes, adhering to the environmental standards. Is this wastewater treatment process fine?;
Bio gas and sludge are the two by-products of the sewage works. Bio gas is often used as a fuel for cooking and lighting. Sludge is used for road surfacing as it can set into a hard solid. As a fertilizer because it is rich in nitrogen and phosphorus. As a raw material to produce biogas. To fill quarries for land reclamation. Is carbondioxide, the largest component of biogas?;
Many substances absorb water from the air. Such substances are said to be hygroscopic. A hygroscopic substance is one which absorbs water from the atmosphere. Which of the following is not an example of a hygroscopic substance? (a) Anhydrous copper II sulphate (b) Quick lime (c) Concentrated sulphuric acid (d) Magnesium hydrogen carbonate;
Some hygroscopic substances absorb so much water from the atmosphere that they dissolve in it. Such substances are said to be deliquescent. Which of the following is not an example of a deliquescent substance? (a) Concentrated sulphuric acid (b) Calcium chloride (c) Sodium hydroxide (d) Iron III chloride;
All deliquescent substances are hygroscopic, but hygroscopic substances are not necessarily deliquescent. Deliquescence is the absorption of water from the atmosphere by a solid to form a solution. Is potassium hydroxide, a deliquescent substance?;
Some substances form crystals that contain water. The water is chemically combined with the substance to form a crystal. A crystal is a solid that has solidified in a definite regular shape. The water comes off when the crystals are heated, and the crystals lose their shape and sometimes colour. Jeremiah says that a crystalline compound containing water is called anhydrous, and the one without water is called hydrated. Do you agree with him?;
Hydrated salts include: Copper II sulphate crystals with 5H₂O of crystallisation, Iron II sulphate crystals with 7H₂O of crystallisation, magnesium sulphate crystals with 7H₂O of crystallisation, sodium carbonate crystals with 10H₂O of crystallisation, and sodium sulphate crystals with 10H₂O of crystallisation. Is it true that the water comes off when the crystals are heated, and the crystals lose their shape and sometimes colour?;
Water of crystallization is the definite amount of water with which some substances chemically combine when they form crystals from their solutions in water. It is sometimes referred to as water of hydration. Are crystals amorphous?;
Efflorescence is the giving up of water of crystallization by a crystal to the atmosphere. An efflorescent be a substance which loses its water of crystallization when exposed to the atmosphere. Is efflorescence, accompained with the loss of the crystalline nature?; 
Water can be classified as hard or soft. Hard water is water which does not readily form lather with soap. Soft water readily forms lather with soap. Examples of soft water include: Rain water, distilled water, deionised water, etc. Examples of hard water include: Tap water, sea water, borehole water, well water, spring water, etc. Does soft water form scum with soap?;  
Compounds that cause hardness of water include: Calcium hydrogen carbonate, Magnesium hydrogen carbonate, CaCl₂, MgCl₂, CaSO₄ and MgSO₄. Does hard water form scum with soap?;  
Which of the following substances does not cause hard water? (a) Calcium nitrate (b) Calcium hydrogen carbonate (c) CaCl₂ (d) CaSO₄;
Soap is a sodium or potassium salt of a long chain carboxylic acid. It is known as sodium stearate, Na-st or potassium stearate, K-st. Soap reacts with magnesium or calcium ions to form dirty white solids called scum. So, when hard water is used for washing, a lot of soap is used because part of the soap initially reacts with calcium and magnesium ions to form scum. Is it calcium stearate and magnesium stearate that are scum?;
Rain dissolves carbondioxide as it falls, forming dilute carbonic acid, which makes it acidic. This acidic water, when passing through rocks containing calcium carbonate or magnesium carbonate, reacts with some of these carbonates. The carbonates react with the carbonic acid to produce soluble calcium hydrogen carbonate or magnesium hydrogen carbonate. When the acidic water passes rocks containing calcium sulphate or magnesium sulphate, dissolution occurs, releasing calcium ions or magnesium ions along with sulphate ions into the water. This makes the water hard because calcium and magnesium ions in solution react with soap and stop it from forming lather readily. Is deionised water still hard water?;
Water is said to be hard if it contains calcium or magnesium ions. There are two types of water hardness. Temporary hardness which is caused by the presence of dissolved magnesium hydrogen carbonate or calcium hydrogen carbonate in water and can be removed by boiling. Permanent hardness which is caused by the presence of magnesium sulphate or magnesium chloride or calcium sulphate or calcium chloride in water which cannot be decomposed by boiling hence ‘permanent’. Are all these statements accurate?;
Temporary hardness of water can be removed by boiling: Boiling decomposes calcium hydrogen carbonate and magnesium hydrogen carbonate to form insoluble calcium carbonate and magnesium carbonate respectively. The insoluble carbonates are filtered off leaving soft water. The calcium and magnesium carbonates may be deposited as solids as boiler scales or kettle fur. Figure197.2.4.carbon_in_the_environment_image_024.jpg. The boiler sale or fur produced is an insulator hence a lot of heat is required for boiling, and this wastes a lot of fuel or electricity. The fur produced may also block pipes carrying boiled water and possibly causing them to burst. Can permanent hardness of water be removed by the same method?;
Temporary hardness of water can be removed by chemical means. Temporary water hardness can be removed by adding mineral acids like hydrochloric acid and sulphuric acid that react with the soluble magnesium or calcium hydrogen carbonates to form a salt, water and carbondioxide. A calculated quantity of calcium hydroxide is used to remove temporary hardness of water. It reacts with the soluble magnesium or calcium hydrogen carbonates to form insoluble magnesium and calcium carbonates respectively. This method is cheaper than boiling as calcium hydroxide is readily available. However, when excess lime water is used, the water becomes hard again. Does aqueous Ammonia precipitate out calcium or magnesium carbonate?; 
Distillation is one of the common methods of removing both temporary and permanent hardness. Water is boiled to form steam which is condensed to form pure and soft water. Solid impurities are left in the distillation flask. Can distillation be used on a large scale?;
Just like distillation, addition of sodium carbonate/washing soda, removes both temporary and permanent hardness. Washing soda precipitates insoluble calcium carbonate or magnesium carbonate which can then be filtered off. The method is very cheap and easy to carry out on a large scale. However, the precipitation reaction forms insoluble carbonates which stain the clothes and, sodium carbonate hydrolyses in water to form an alkali which attacks the skin. Are all these statements true?;
Which of the following methods can't be used to remove permanent water hardness? (a) Addition of lime water (b) Addition of washing soda (c) Distillation (d) Passing water through permutit;
Just like distillation and addition of sodium carbonate/washing soda, passing water through permutit/Sodium aluminium silicate, removes both temporary and permanent hardness. The calcium and magnesium ions in hard water can be exchanged with sodium ions using a suitable ion exchange material. This makes the water to become soft. The common ion exchange materials are zeolites and permutit. Zeolites are natural occurring forms of sodium aluminium silicate and permutit is the artificial form. Zeolite/permutit can be represented by the formula, Na₂Y. Permutit is normally packed in a container and hard water is allowed to pass through it. This method works on the principle of ion exchange. During the process, calcium and magnesium ions are removed from water and they appear as precipitates of aluminium silicate. Is it true that the permutit can be recovered and used several times?;
To distinguish between hard water, temporary hard water and soft water, Cathy placed equal volumes of each unboiled water samples in three different conical flasks. She run soap solution from the burette into each sample while shaking the conical flask vigorously until when lather formed. The soft water required the least volume of soap solution to form lather compared to the samples of hard water. She repeated the above procedure with the boiled water sample. Soft water required approximately the same volume of soap solution to form lather as the unboiled soft water. Temporary hard water, after boiling, required less volume of soap solution to form lather than the unboiled one. This is because the water was made soft by boiling and thus formed lather readily. Even after boiling, permanent hard water required the same volume of soap solution as the unboiled to form lather. The water still remained hard and took time to form lather. Does this mean that boiling can't decompose the Calcium and magnesium hydrogen carbonates in permanent hard water?;
Hard water is rich in calcium which builds strong bones and teeth. Calcium in hard water is responsible for the formation of strong shells of many animals e.g., snails and egg shells. Hard water has a good taste and it is used in the brewing industry. Hard water prevents lead poisoning and it is the only type of water transported by lead pipes. It is also true that magnesium in hard water is important for photosynthesis. Is it because it is used for the formation of chlorophyll?; 
Hard water wastes soap due to formation of scum. Causes dirty marks on clothes due to scum and also damages silk and nylon. Causes fur in kettles and pans leading to wastage of fuel, since fur is a bad conductor of heat. Causes wrong colours in the dyeing process and poor finish during leather tanning. Causes formation of boiler scale which wastes fuel, since boiler scale is a bad conductor of heat. The boiler scales may also block the pipes carrying boiling water hence causing the pipes to burst. Is it true that due to its bad taste, hard water, isn't used in the brewing industry?;
Hydrogen is the smallest element and the lightest gas. It is the first element in the periodic table of elements. Hydrogen usually does not occur naturally in a Free State, except when it is in negligible quantities, but in combined states as water, acid, hydrocarbons and other organic compounds. In nature, hydrogen exists as a diatomic molecule, meaning one molecule contains two atoms. Is water, the major source of hydrogen in nature?;
Hydrogen is prepared in the laboratory by the action of either dilute hydrochloric acid or dilute sulphuric acid on zinc granules or zinc metal. When preparing hydrogen in the laboratory, zinc granules are used instead of pure zinc, because some impurities in the zinc granules act as catalysts. Figure246.1.8.water_image_010.jpg. Are catalysts considered as reactants?;
In the laboratory preparation of hydrogen, dilute sulphuric acid is added to zinc granules in a flask through the thistle funnel. A little copper II Sulphate solution is added as a catalyst to speed up the reaction. Effervescence occurs as hydrogen gas is produced and collected over water. If the gas is required dry, it is passed through a wash bottle containing concentrated sulphuric acid or a U-tube containing fused calcium chloride and collected by upward delivery/downward displacement of air, as its less dense than air. Figure247.1.8.water_image_011.jpg. Can magnesium and iron be used instead of zinc?;
On a large scale, hydrogen gas is manufactured by the Bosch process. The raw materials used include coke and steam. Steam is passed over hot coke to form carbon monoxide and hydrogen gas. A combination of carbon monoxide and hydrogen gas is water gas. The carbon monoxide is absorbed in another chemical, leaving hydrogen gas behind. Is coke a carbon compound?;
Hydrogen is a colourless, odourless and tasteless gas. It’s neutral to litmus paper. It’s less dense than air. It is the lightest substance known, air is 14.5 times denser. It is only slightly soluble in water. Is hydrogen gas, a diatomic molecule?; 
Hydrogen burns quietly with a pale blue flame in air forming water vapour. The gaseous product can be condensed in a cool environment to form a colourless liquid. This reaction is very dangerous because it leads to the explosion of the test tube. Figure248.1.8.water_image_012.jpg. Is it true that the colourless liquid formed, turns anhydrous copper II sulphate to white?;
A mixture of hydrogen and air explodes with a ‘pop’ when lighted. When a burning splint is brought into a gas jar of hydrogen, the splint will be extinguished with a pop sound. Is this the test for hydrogen in the laboratory?;
Hydrogen is a reducing agent. It removes oxygen from the oxides of some metals, reducing them to the metals and itself is oxidized to water. An oxide is a compound formed between a metal or non-metal with oxygen. When dry hydrogen is passed over heated CuO in a combustion tube, a red glow spreads through the black oxide that then turns to brown as the oxide is reduced to the brown copper metal and a colourless liquid that turns white anhydrous copper II sulphate blue, forms on the cooler parts of the tube. Figure249.1.8.water_image_013.jpg. Hydrogen also reduces  PbO, Fe₂O₃ and Fe₃O₄. Can hydrogen reduce NaO?;
Reduction can be defined as the addition of hydrogen to a substance or the removal of oxygen from a substance. When reducing an oxide using hydrogen, dry hydrogen gas must be used. The combustion tube must be in a slanting position so as to prevent the water formed from running back to the hot part of the tube. Hydrogen should be passed through the combustion tube to expel out air before heating the oxide. Hydrogen should be passed through the tube for some time after heating. This prevents re-oxidation of the copper. The excess hydrogen should be burnt to prevent explosion with air. Can oxidation be defined as the removal of hydrogen from a substance or the addition of oxygen to a substance?;
A mixture of chlorine and hydrogen appears not to react at room temperature, but when exposed to sun light or heated, the mixture explodes forming misty fumes of hydrogen chloride gas. When hydrogen chloride gas is dissolved in water, it becomes hydrochloric acid. Is the pH of hydrochloric acid equal to 7?; 
Hydrogen reacts with highly reactive metals to form hydrides. For example, sodium reacts with hydrogen to form sodium hydride. Is NaH, the chemical formula for sodium hydride?;
Hydrogen reacts with nitrogen at 500⁰C and 200atm to form ammonia gas. This is a reversible reaction, that is also known as the harber process. Is NH₂, the chemical formula for ammonia gas?;
Hydrogen reacts with sulphur forming hydrogen sulphide gas. Is this the gas that has a smell of a rotten egg?;
The hardening of oils in fats to make margarine and cooling fats like blue band, is a process that uses hydrogen. This process is called hydrogenation. During this process, oil is converted to margarine by reacting it with hydrogen in the presence of a catalyst, nickel at 180⁰C and 2atm. The oil absorbs hydrogen to form fats. Isn't nickel, in group II of the periodic table?;
Hydrogen is used in the manufacture of ammonia. Ammonia is an important gas because it is used in the manufacture of fertilizers, nitric acid and explosives. Is it true that during the harber process, hydrogen is reacted with nitrogen gas to give ammonia in the presence of iron as a catalyst?;
Hydrogen is used in the manufacture of hydrochloric acid. In this process, hydrogen is reacted with chlorine to form hydrogen chloride gas. When hydrogen chloride gas is dissolved in water, it becomes hydrochloric acid. Is dilute hydrochloric acid, pale-yellow in colour?; 
Hydrogen is used: In an oxy-hydrogen flame which is very hot for cutting and wielding steel. To fill weather balloons because of its lightness. In the manufacture of hydrogen bombs. In converting coal into synthetic petrol. And, as a rocket fuel. Is hydrogen also used in the hardening of oils in fats to make margarine, and in the manufacture of both ammonia and hydrochloric acid?;
