Qn. The human stomach contains hydrochloric acid with a pH of about 2. The acid helps to kill any germs in our stomach. However, when the stomach walls produce too much of the acid, we suffer from stomach pains and heartburn. One way to deal with this problem is to take an antacid. The main component of an antacid is sodium hydrogen carbonate. Explain how the antacid helps to cure heartburn. Include an equation (3 scores);
Qn. A man from the village is not used to brushing his teeth with a tooth paste after a meal every evening and requested to be educated about the underlying facts behind this practice. He felt just washing his mouth with water was sufficient enough to stay clean. 
Task:
As a chemistry learner:
(a) state why it was necessary to use a toothpaste.
(b) help the man understand how it works.
(c) advise the man on the challenges associated with long term use of the paste. 
(d) How does the method compare with the man's way of maintaining clean and healthy teeth? (10 scores);
Qn. Melisa wants to carry out a neutralization reaction in the laboratory. Explain her on how she can conduct this experiment along with the expected benefits of this reaction to the country.;
Qn. While in the city, David used to make a local beverage using traditional raw materials. However, with an increase in the production, there was need for expansion and thus David had to migrate to Kabale where he had bought some land in his late twenties. On reaching Kabale, he couldn’t easily find the common indicators to use to determine the pH of his beverage and obtaining them from the city was quite expensive. Having heard from his friend about organic indicators being cheap, David has developed interest in making one but he is not so sure of the steps involved.
As a friend to David, who understands the process of making an organic indicator, write a letter directing him on how to make and use an organic indicator and clearly explain to him the disadvantages of using such an indicator in the long run (10 scores);
Qn. In a recent chemistry class, students were introduced to the concept of neutralization reactions and their widespread applications. Additionally, they explored the reactions of acids with metals and carbonates, uncovering their significance in chemical reactions.
(a) Differentiate between a neutralisation reaction and a displacement reaction (02 scores)
(b) Giving an example in each case, write an equation and its observation, for the reaction of an acid of your choice with:
(i) A metal (02 scores)
(ii) A base (02 scores)
(ii) A metal carbonate (02 scores)
(c) Briefly explain two applications of neutralization reactions (02 scores);
Qn. An indicator is a substance which shows whether a solution is acidic, alkaline or neutral. In a chemistry laboratory session, students are investigating both organic and inorganic acid-base indicators. They are first of all preparing an organic indicator and then conducting experiments to observe the colour changes that occur when the different indicators are added to acidic and basic solutions. However, they lack a solid understanding of the concepts they are exploring.
You have been appointed by the chemistry teacher to sensitize these learners. 
Task: 
Prepare a presentation you will deliver to the learners.;