Dobereiner and Newlands in the 1800s were the first scientists who attempted to come up with some sort of classification of elements known by that time. They devised the Law of Triads and the Law of Octaves. The periodic table is a table of elements arranged in order of increasing atomic number. It was developed in order to put together elements with similar chemical properties. Was the first periodic table developed by Dobereiner and Newlands?;
The first periodic table was developed by a Russian scientist called Dmitri Mendeleev in the early 19th century. According to Mendeleev, he classified all the elements according to their mass numbers or atomic masses but this criterion failed to categorize elements with similar chemical properties together because mass number does not determine the chemical properties of an element. Using his arrangement, did Mendeleev leave any gaps in his Periodic table?;
Dmitri Mendeleev used the patterns of his periodic table to make predictions of the properties of the undiscovered elements, with quite remarkable accuracy. As predicted, the original Periodic table was modified and corrected several times to accommodate new elements that were discovered later. It was in 1913, when an English scientist called Moseley attempted to modify the periodic table of Mendeleev. Did he classify all the elements according to their atomic masses?; 
Using X-ray spectroscopy, Moseley discovered that elements' properties were better organized by atomic number rather than atomic weight. He therefore used atomic number to classify all the elements and all the elements with similar chemical properties found themselves together, and this periodic table was referred to as the modern periodic table. The modern periodic table has a law called the periodic table law. Does it state that the chemical property of an element is the function of its atomic number?;
The modern periodic table is divided into groups and periods of the elements. An element is a pure substance that cannot be split or divided into two or more simpler forms by any known chemical means. There are about 118 different types of elements. Most of the elements exist in the earth crust. However, some of these elements are more abundant than others. Can elements with different chemical properties be found in the same column called a group?;
Modern technology, such as particle accelerators, has enabled scientists to synthesize superheavy elements that exist only briefly before decaying. By 1869, only 63 elements had been discovered and by 2019, they were 118 elements. Joanita says that the periodic table provides a great deal of information about elements, and that it can be used to predict both the chemical and physical properties of elements that make up the universe. Does the knowledge of the physical properties of elements enable one to make the right choices for the materials to use for different purposes, explain the occurrence of particular processes and tell the durability of substances or materials?;
In the periodic table, a group number is written in Roman numerals. The horizontal rows of the elements are called periods. The period number is written in Arabic numerals. There are 8 groups in the periodic table numbered I–VIII. Group VIII is also known as group O. The group number represents the number of electrons in the outer most shell or energy level. Elements of the same group have similar chemical properties. Is it because they have a similar number of inner most energy level electrons, also called the valency electrons?;
Atomic size increases down the group as more energy levels are added. Figure145.2.3.the_periodic_table_image_001.jpg. Each element is represented by a unique chemical symbol. Elements in the same group have a common valency. The group number is equal to the number of electrons in the outer most energy level of the element. There are 7 periods in the periodic table. Elements in the same period have the same number of energy levels. Could one use atomic radius to refer to atomic size?;
Hydrogen is considered a group I element because it has a valency of 1 and can form an ion with positive charge of 1. It is placed it group VII because it reacts like group VII elements e.g., sodium hydride is an ionic compound.  Figure146.2.3.the_periodic_table_image_002.jpg. Sometimes, elements in the different groups are known by different names. Are group I elements also known as the alkaline earth metals?;
Elements in the same period have the same number of energy levels, occupied by electrons and give the period number. The atomic radius/size decreases across a period from left to right. Elements in the same period have different chemical properties. Elements in the same period have different valencies. Each period ends with a noble gas. Can Hydrogen be placed in both group I and VII of the periodic table?;
Sometimes, elements in the different groups are known by different names. Group I are Alkali metals, Group II are Alkaline earth metals, Group VII are Halogens, Group VIII are Noble gases/Rare gases/Inert gases. The elements in the periodic table are classified as Metals, Metalloids, Non-metals and Noble/Rare gases/Inert gases. Are metals on the left of the periodic table in group I, II, III and IV?;
There are 7 semi-metals/metalloids in the periodic table. Boron in group III, Silicon and Germanium in group IV, Arsenic and Antimony in group V and the other 2 are in group VI. Clare says that some of the metalloids such as silicon and germanium are semi-conductors, meaning, they can carry an electrical charge under specific conditions. She says that this is the property that makes metalloids economically useful and valuable in the semi-conductor and computer chip industry. Do you support her reasoning?;
Non-metals are on the right of the periodic table in groups V, VI and VII. Non-metals react by gain of electrons. Noble/rare/inert gases are at the extreme right of the periodic table in group VIII/group O. Noble gases are not reactive because they are very stable. Transition elements are found between group II and III and towards the bottom of the periodic table. Transition elements form coloured compounds and have variable valencies. Could aluminium be one of the examples of transition elements?;
A metal is an element which forms positive ions by losing electrons except hydrogen. The metallic character of elements generally increases from the top to bottom, down a group and generally decreases from the left to the right of a period. A non-metal is an element which forms negative ions by gaining electrons. Are all group VII elements, non-metals?;
Metals are generally hard except Sodium and Potassium. They generally have high melting and boiling points. They conduct electricity and heat e.g., iron, copper, aluminum etc. Some metals are magnetic e.g., iron. They are malleable and ductile i.e., they can be bent without necessarily breaking. They exist as solids at room temperature except mercury. Gallium is a liquid at just above room temperature. Does mercury exist as a gas at room temperature?;
Non-metals have low melting and boiling points except diamond and graphite. They are brittle, hard but can easily be broken if force is applied on them. They exist as soft solids except diamond, liquids and gases at room temperature except bromine. They are insulators except graphite. Is it true that non-metals are also non-magnetic?; 
Metals are Lustrous, can be polished i.e., shinning and thus can be used to make jewelry. Strong and tough, high tensile strength and thus can be used to build scaffolding and bridges. Malleable, Able to be hammered or pressed into shape without breaking/cracking and thus can be used in making electrical cables. Ductile, Able to be deformed without losing toughness, not brittle. Good conductors of heat and electricity and thus can be used to make pans for cooking and electric cables. Sonorous i.e., produce a deep/ringing sound when hit and thus can be used in making bells. Is it true that metals generally have low densities?;
Non-metals are not lustrous except Iodine. Low tensile strength. Not malleable. Not ductile. Poor conductors of heat and thus can be used to make pan handles. Do not conduct electricity and thus can be used as insulating material around wire cables. Not sonorous. Is it true that non-metals generally have low densities?;
Elements in the same group react in similar ways because they have the same number of electrons in their outer most energy level or shell. Down the group of metals, reactivity increases. This is because of increase in atomic size/atomic radius. As the size of atoms increase, the outer most electrons become loosely held because they are no longer strongly attracted by the nucleus, hence, such electrons are easily lost. Junior says that since metals react by gain of electrons, the more easily a metal gains electrons, the more reactive that metal is. Could he be right?; 
Down the group of non-metals, reactivity decreases. This is due to an increase in atomic radius. As the atomic sizes increase, the forces of attraction of the nucleus for the electrons decreases, hence electrons cannot be gained readily. Is it true that the more easily a non-metal gains electrons, the more reactive that non-metal is?;
Across the period of elements from the left to the right, reactivity decreases from group I to group IV and then increases up to group VII and falls sharply in group VIII. This is because, as you go across the period, the effective force of the nucleus increases, hence the outer most electrons become more strongly attracted. Is Neon one of the very reactive elements?; 
The development of atomic structure understanding has evolved significantly over history: Ancient Greek philosophers like Democritus proposed the concept of atoms as indivisible particles. John Dalton's early 19th-century atomic theory suggested atoms combine in whole-number ratios. J.J.Thomson's late 19th-century experiments led to the discovery of electrons. Ernest Rutherford's early 20th-century gold foil experiment revealed the nucleus, leading to his nuclear model of the atom. Niels Bohr expanded upon Rutherford's model with quantised energy levels for electrons. The mid-20th century saw the development of quantum mechanics, refining atomic theory with principles like wave-particle duality. Figure146.2.3.the_periodic_table_image_102.jpg. Is it true that today's atomic model is based on quantum mechanics, describing atoms as nuclei surrounded by electron clouds in specific energy levels?; 
Atomic structure deals with the study of the composition of an atom. Atoms are the building blocks from which all matter is made. An atom is the smallest particle of an element that takes part in a chemical reaction. All atoms of the same element are identical and different from those of other elements. An atom is spherical in shape and has a small region in the centre called the nucleus. Is it true that some atoms are made up of more than two regions?;
An atom consists of electrons moving around a small nucleus. The nucleus occupies the central part of the atom. This part is smaller compared to the orbit. The nucleus is extremely dense/heavy because of the presence of protons and neutrons. The nucleus of a hydrogen atom consists of a single proton. The nuclei of other atoms consist of both protons and neutrons. The number of protons varies from 1 to 92. The number of protons in the nucleus of an atom is called the atomic number. Is the hydrogen atom considered the lightest atom?;
The Orbit/shell/Energy level is the space outside the nucleus of an atom where electrons revolve or are found. The greater the number of electrons in an atom, the greater the number of orbits. Studies have shown that electrons rotate around the orbits i.e., they are not stationary within the orbit. Electrons occupy the orbits according to their energy levels. Is it true that the orbits nearer to the nucleus have the highest energy while those orbits far from the nucleus have the lowest energy?;
The energy level closest to the nucleus is called the 1ˢᵗ energy level or the K shell. The 2ⁿᵈ closest shell to the nucleus is the 2ⁿᵈ energy level or the L shell. This is followed by the 3ʳᵈ shell or the M shell. So, the energy levels are named 1ˢᵗ, 2ⁿᵈ, 3ʳᵈ, 4ᵗʰ, etc., or K, L, M, N etc., from the shell closest to the nucleus outwardly. Is the outermost electron shell also called the valence electron shell?;
The electrons are held within an atom by an electrostatic force of attraction between themselves and the positive charge of the protons in the nucleus. An electron can only remain rotating within the same orbit when the centripetal force and centrifugal forces are balanced. Is it true that the chemical property of an element or atom is determined only by the electrons and the protons and not the neutrons?;
The atom is made up of three fundamental sub-atomic particles called protons, neutrons and electrons. Figure147.2.3.the_periodic_table_image_003.jpg. These particles differ from each other in terms of mass and charge. Protons, p, are present in the nucleus of an atom. A proton has one positive charge, +1, the smallest unit positive charge that can exist. Neutrons, n, are present in the nucleus of all atoms except hydrogen. They have no charge/Are neutral. They have a relative mass of 1 i.e., the mass is approximately the same as that of a proton. Are the particles that occupy the nucleus of an atom, collectively called Nucleons?;
Electrons occur in the energy levels or electron shells and are constantly rotating around the nucleus. Electrons move in orbits around the nucleus, like planets move around the sun. An electron has one negative charge, the smallest unit negative charge that can exist. The masses of particles in atoms are measured by a unit called atomic mass unit. 1 amu is equivalent to the mass of hydrogen which is the smallest atom. Both protons and neutrons have a mass of 1 amu. An electron has a very small mass of 1/1840 amu. Does 1/1840 amu mean that the electron is 1/1840 times heavier than the proton or neutron?;
The mass of an electron is said to be negligible. Meaning, it is the protons and neutrons that account for most of the mass of the atom, their number determines the overall mass of the atom. An atom is neutral. Does it mean that the number of electrons must equal the number of protons in the nucleus?; 
An atom of any element differs from those of the other elements due to the difference brought about by atomic number and atomic mass of different elements. Atomic number, Z, is the total number of protons in the nucleus of an atom of an element. The atomic number of each element is unique and it is used to identify the element. Can atoms of the same element have different atomic numbers?;
Nucleon Number/Mass Number/Atomic Mass, denoted by letter A, is the sum of all protons and all neutrons in the nucleus of an atom. The mass number and atomic number of an element can be written together with the symbol to completely describe the atom of an element. The mass number is written on the top left-hand corner and atomic number is written on the bottom left-hand corner of the symbol. Is it true that an atom can be represented as: Figure153.2.3.the_periodic_table_image_009.jpg. Where X is the symbol of an element, A is the atomic mass or mass number or nucleon number and Z is the atomic number or proton number?;
An atom of element of X has atomic number, 20 and mass number, 40. Kateregga says that X has an electronic configuration of 2:8:8:2, is in group II because it has two electrons in the outermost shell, is in period 4 because it has four shells/orbits occupied by electrons, its chloride is XCl₂ and its oxide, X₂O. Is Kateregga telling the truth?;
Element Y has atomic number, 11. Kateregga says that Y has an electronic configuration of 2:8:1, is in period three because it has three shells having electrons, is in group I because it has one electron in the last orbit/shell and that the formula of the sulphate of Y is Y₂SO₄. Is Kateregga telling the truth?;
Isotopes are different atoms of the same element having the same number of protons but different number of neutrons, therefore different mass numbers. For elements that show isotopy, the most abundant/common isotope is taken to be the representative of all the elements. The abundance is usually given as a percentage. Examples. Figure150.2.3.the_periodic_table_image_006.jpg. Figure151.2.3.the_periodic_table_image_007.jpg. Is it true that isotopes always have the same physical properties?;
Isotopes have the same number of protons. They have a different number of neutrons. They have the same number of electrons. They share the same chemical properties but may differ in their physical properties. Does potassium and oxygen have isotopes?;
Isotopy is the existence of atoms of the same element with the same number of protons but different mass numbers due to the difference in the number of neutrons. Relative atomic mass is the mass of one atom of an element compared to 1/12ᵗʰ of the mass of the carbon-12 isotope. It is the mass of one atom of the element divided by 1/12ᵗʰ of the mass of carbon-12 isotope. Figure152.2.3.the_periodic_table_image_008.jpg. Relative atomic mass is a ratio of the same quantity and therefore, it does not have units. Using the formula above, hydrogen was given a mass of 1.0008 ≈ 1, Oxygen of 16, Nitrogen of 14, etc. Is the relative atomic mass always a whole number?;
The relative atomic mass is not always a whole number due to the presence of isotopes. In such a case, the value is obtained by taking the average of the relative masses of isotopes of an element based on their natural abundance. Is it true that natural chlorine which consists of 75% Chlorine–35 and 25% Chlorine-37 has a relative atomic mass of 35.5?;
A sample of chlorine is a mixture of two isotopes, chlorine–35 and chlorine-37 in the ratio of 3:1. Which of the following is the Relative atomic mass of the chlorine atom? (a) 16 (b) 37.5 (c) 35.5 (d) 33.3;
The way electrons are arranged in an atom is referred to as electronic structure. The electrons move in definite orbits around the nucleus. The orbits which electrons occupy have definite energies. All electrons in a given shell have approximately equal energy. This energy increases in successive shells outwards from the nucleus. Electrons exist singly or in pairs in the energy levels. The orbit nearer the nucleus has less energy than subsequent orbits. The further away the orbit is from the nucleus, the greater the energy. When electrons gain energy, do they move to higher orbits?; 
The number of electrons that can fill an energy level or shell numbered n is 2n², where n is the number of orbits. If n = 1, number of electrons = 2. If n = 2, number of electrons = 8. If n = 3, number of electrons = 18. However, a given energy shell can have less than the maximum number of electrons but not more. The first shell has the lowest energy and electrons fill it first. It holds a maximum of two electrons. The second and third orbits, which are farther away from the nucleus, can each have a maximum of 8 electrons. Is it true that in the outer most shell of any atom, the maximum number of electrons possible is 7?;
The electronic configuration of an atom is an arrangement of electrons according to the sequence of energy levels. It is written by showing the number of electrons in each energy level, starting with electrons in the first energy level. Is it true that electronic configuration is not the same as electron structure?;
The valency of an element can be derived from the electronic structure of its atom. Valency is the combining power of an element or radical. The power of an element to combine with others is determined by the structure of its atoms. This therefore implies that the valency of an element can be determined from the electron structure of its atoms. A radical is an atom or group of atoms that exist in several compounds but does not exist on its own. Is it true that the valency of the hydrogen carbonate radical is 2?;
Elements with atoms having 1-4 electrons in the outer most shell, have valencies equivalent to the number of electrons in the outer most shell. Elements with atoms having 5–7 electrons in the outer most shell, have valencies equal to the number of electrons gained to acquire a stable electronic configuration, i.e, 8 – electrons in the outer shell. Noble gases are said to be unreactive elements because they have a stable electronic configuration in which their outermost orbit has eight electrons giving them a valency of zero. For metals with variable valencies, Roman numerals are included in their name to indicate the valencies of the metal. Can valency also be defined as the number of electrons lost or gained by an element in order to attain a stable electronic structure?;
Is it true that the information obtained from the electronic configuration of an atom can be used to tell whether the element is a metal or non-metal or metalloid or rare gas, to determine the valency/valence of the element and to predict the physical properties of the element?;
If an atom does not have 2 or 8 valence electrons, it is not stable! Not stable means the atom will react by gaining or losing electrons, just to make sure that it has either a ‘2’ or ‘8’ as the number of valence electrons. When elements gain or lose electrons to become stable, they form “ions”. An ion is an electrically charged particle formed from an atom or a group of chemically combined atoms by gaining or losing one or more electrons. Is it true that ions are either negatively charged or positively charged?;
Positive ions are formed when atoms or group of chemically combined atoms lose electrons. Atoms lose electrons so as to acquire a stable electronic configuration as the noble gases. The positive ions/cations are formed by metal atoms, hydrogen atoms and ammonium. Metal atoms having 1-3 electrons in the outer most shells lose these electrons to form positive ions. Do cations have more protons than neutrons?;
Sodium atom with 11 electrons and electronic configuration, 2:8:1, has 1 electron more than the stable configuration of a noble gas, 2:8. During reaction, sodium loses the 1 electron in the outer most energy level to become stable and forms sodium ion with electronic configuration, 2:8. Is the electron configuration of Na⁺ similar to that of Li⁺, Mg²⁺ and Al³⁺?;
Negative ions/anions are formed when atoms gain electrons. Atoms gain electrons so as to acquire a stable electronic configuration as the noble gases. The anions are formed by non-metal atoms. Non-metals having 5-7 electrons in their outer most shell gain electrons to form negative ions. Do anions have more protons than electrons?;
Chlorine atom with electronic configuration, 2:8:7, lacks only one electron to attain the stable electronic configuration of a noble gas, 2:8:8. The chlorine atom therefore gains the one electron during reaction and forms a chloride ion. Is the electronic configuration of Cl⁻ similar to that of S²⁻?;
