Carbon is an element in period II and group IV in the periodic table with mass number 12 and atomic number 6. It is the fourth most likely abundant element in the universe and it is the building block of life. Carbon occurs in both free states and combined states. In combined states, it occurs as a constituent of numerous naturally occurring substances such as coal, mineral oils, carbonates and in all living things. As an element, it occurs in both natural forms and synthetic forms. In air, it occurs to a small but very important extent, 0.003% as carbon dioxide. Is graphite, the purest form of carbon?;
Carbon is polmorphic. Polymorphism refers to the ability of a substance to exist in different crystal forms or molecular arrangements while maintaining the same chemical composition. Allotropy, a specific type of polymorphism, is caused by the possibility of more than one arrangement of atoms of an element. Allotropy is the existence of an element in different forms in the same physical state. Allotropes are the different forms in which an element exists without change of physical state. Are the allotropes of carbon more than two?;
An allotrope is one of two or more distinct forms of an element that exist without change of physical state. Different allotropes of the same element always have different crystalline structures and physical properties but the same chemical properties. Carbon is one of those elements that exist in many forms. Most importantly as diamond and graphite. The other forms in which carbon exists are amorphous carbon e.g., animal charcoal, wood charcoal, lamp black, sugar charcoal, coke and soot and fullerenes. Is it only the non-metals that have allotropes?;
Common elements which exhibit a characteristic of allotropy include carbon, sulphur and phosphorous. Which of the following is not an allotrope of carbon?  (a) Diamond (b) Graphene (c) Fullerenes (d) Carbon fibres; 
When equal masses of graphite, diamond and amorphous carbon are separately burnt in excess pure oxygen under the same conditions, each produces the same quantity of a gas that turns lime water milky and no any other product. When 1g of diamond or graphite or amorphous carbon burns in oxygen, they form 3.67g of carbon dioxide only. Does this prove that graphite, diamond and amorphous carbon are made of the same metal, carbon?;
Diamond. Diamond is a colourless, crystalline, sparkling and transparent solid that glitters. It is the hardest natural substance ever known. Is diamond, the purest form of the non-metal, carbon?;
In diamond, the structure consists of an infinite number of carbon atoms. Each carbon atom in diamond is bonded to four other carbon atoms by strong covalent bonds resulting into a tetrahedral arrangement. The coordination number of each carbon atom is four, meaning that each carbon atom is surrounded by four other carbon atoms. Are the valence electrons of carbon in diamond, delocalised?;
In diamond, the valence electrons of carbon are all used in forming covalent bonds and they are therefore localised. The carbon atoms in diamond are tetrahedrally arranged and are equidistant from each other. The bonding extends in 3 dimensions to give a diamond crystal, a giant three-dimensional atomic structure. Alicia says that a three-dimensional structure could simply mean a physical arrangement that occupies space in three spatial dimensions: length, width, and height. Could that be true?;
Diamond is a non-conductor of electricity, because all the electrons in the carbon atoms have been used for bonding. There are no delocalized/mobile electrons in diamond. It has a high density, due to close packing of carbon atoms. The density of diamond is 3.5gcm⁻³. It’s a colourless, crystalline, sparkling and transparent solid that glitters. It’s the hardest natural substance known. This is because the carbon atoms are closely parked and are joined by strong ionic bonds. It is resistant to melting. The melting point of diamond is around 3930⁰C. The high melting point of diamond is because of the strong covalent bonds between the carbon atoms. Are all these statements true?;
Diamond is used in making jewellery such as necklaces and ear rings. It has a very high refractive index and thus it can refract light producing sparkling brilliance. It’s used for making drilling machines, rock borers and glass cutters because of its hardness. Diamond is bright and is used to make laser beams. Is it true that diamond can be used as an insulator since it is non-conductor of electricity?; 
Graphite exists as black soft slippery hexagonal crystals and naturally, it is found under the ground as an impure form called plumbago. Graphite consists of an infinite number of carbon atoms, each covalently bonded to three other carbon atoms forming hexagonal rings that are arranged in layers in parallel planes. This leaves every carbon atom at the corner of the hexagonal layer with one free electron that moves freely within the parallel layers. Is it true that each layer of graphite is a giant three-dimensional structure?;
The layers in graphite lie on top of each other and are held by weak Vander Waal’s forces of attraction, allowing the movement of the planes parallel to each other and this makes graphite slippery and very soft. Graphite conducts electricity. Is this because of the delocalized electrons within its layers?;
Graphite is black, shiny and opaque. It’s soft, greasy or soapy because its layers are held by weak Vander Waal's forces of attraction. The parallel layers can slide over one another due to the weak forces holding them. It’s a good conductor of electricity because of the many free mobile electrons. It has low density, 2.3gcm⁻³ compared to diamond because the parallel layers do not pack closely together. Graphite is more resistant to chemical attack than diamond because of the open spaces between the layers. The melting point of graphite is high because of the strong covalent bond between the carbon atoms. Are all these statements true?;
Graphite is used as a lubricant especially in small bearings which require little but regular lubrication because of its slippery nature. It’s used as an electrode during electrolysis, in a blast furnace and in batteries because it is a good conductor of electricity due to the presence of delocalized electrons. It is used to make brushes for electric motors. It is used as a protective coating on iron to prevent rusting. It is used in atomic piles in which uranium atoms split up to form energy. It can also be used in the manufacturer of lead pencils. Could it be because it’s soft, opaque and black?;
Graphene was discovered in 2004 and is made up of single layers of graphite. It is a single layer of carbon atoms arranged in a two-dimensional honeycomb lattice. It is also the basic building block of some other carbon structures. Is it true that unlike graphite, graphene is a weak material?;
Graphene is one of the strongest materials ever discovered that is extremely thin, being just one atom thick. It exhibits excellent electrical and thermal conductivity properties, due to the delocalized electrons. In fact, graphene is able to conduct electricty, one million times better than copper. Is graphene really considered as an allotrope of carbon?;
Graphene has potential applications in electronics, such as in transparent conductive films, flexible electronics, and high-speed transistors, due to its excellent electrical properties. Graphene-based materials are being researched on, for use in batteries and supercapacitors due to their high surface area and electrical conductivity. Graphene-based sensors are being developed for various applications, including biomedical sensing and environmental monitoring, due to their sensitivity and high surface area. Could this graphene be a compound of carbon?; 
Fullerenes are a new allotrope of carbon, a special type of carbon molecules shaped like tiny soccer balls. They're made of 60 carbon atoms arranged in a pattern of hexagons, like honeycombs and pentagons, like on a soccer ball. These molecules have some interesting features. First, they're not very strong magnets to each other, so they melt at a lower temperature than other carbon materials like graphite or diamonds. Can they also can conduct electricity because of the way their electrons move around inside them?;
What's really cool about fullerenes is how they can carry things, like drugs or genetic material. Their soccer ball shape lets them trap these substances inside, protecting them and delivering them to where they're needed in the body. Fullerenes are being used as antioxidants and they have the potential to improve the effectiveness of medicines while reducing side effects. They could also be used to create new types of electronic devices. Could Buckminsterfullerene, having a spherical structure and 60 carbon atoms covalently bonded together, be the most complex fullerene?;
Glassy carbon, Carbon nanotubes, Carbon nanofibers and Lonsdaleite are also allotropes of carbon. These allotropes, along with other carbon-based substances like carbon fibres, exemplify the remarkable versatility of carbon in forming various molecular arrangements. Carbon fibres are composed of carbon atoms bonded together in a crystalline alignment to form a long chain. They have a high strength-to-weight ratio and are flexible. Are all these statements true?;
Carbon fibres exhibit exceptional strength, making them suitable for reinforcing composite materials. They are lightweight, contributing to the overall weight reduction of composite structures. Carbon fibre-reinforced composites are widely used in aerospace applications, such as aircraft and spacecraft, due to their high strength and low weight. Carbon fibre composites are used in the manufacturing of sports equipment like tennis rackets, bicycles, and golf clubs for their lightweight and strong properties. Carbon fibre components are increasingly used in high-performance automotive applications to reduce weight and improve fuel efficiency. Is it true that these fibres can also be called fullerenes?;
Mariam said the other day that much as the carbon fibres have excellent properties, and as a result, a wide range of uses, they are relatively expensive when compared to other similar fibres such as glass fibres or plastic fibres. Is that really true?;
Amorphous carbon are forms of carbon without clearly defined shape or form. Which of the following is not amorphous carbon? (a) Sugar charcoal (b) Lampblack (c) Salt charcoal (d) coke?;
Amorphous carbon exists in many forms such as wood charcoal, animal charcoal, sugar charcoal, lampblack and coke. These forms are black, opaque and dull. They are non-crystalline and fairly conduct electricity since they are found to contain few crystals of graphite joined together by a variety of impurities. They can be used for electronic displays. Is it true that they have the lowest densities among all the allotropes of carbon?;
Wood Charcoal is made by burning wood in a limited supply of air/destructive distillation of wood. It is often made by the people in rural areas and used mainly by people in urban areas. Pieces of wood covered with damp soil are heated in a limited supply of air. Heating removes moisture and other volatile components such as methane, hydrogen, tar, etc., from the wood, leaving behind charcoal. Do softwoodsproduce better charcoal?;
When making wood charcoal, softwoods are avoided, because they burn for less time, which makes it more difficult to make charcoal, especially when done on a small scale. Charcoal from hard wood also has a higher energy content and is easier to handle. Wood charcoal is a black porous solid that is used in gas masks as it is a good absorbent for gases such as ammonia, chlorine and bromine. It’s used as a fuel in homes, for cooking and ironing clothes. Is it true that the use of wood charcoal as a fuel is cheap and efficient but it is sustainable only if it can be made from wood that can be regrown easily?;
Animal Charcoal is made by heating animal bones and remains in a limited supply of air/destructive distillation of animal bones and remains. It contains a lot calcium phosphate and can be used as a fertilizer. Animal charcoal is used to purify substances and has a property of absorbing colouring matter and is thus used to remove brown colour from sugar during its manufacture, making it white. It’s used for treating snake bites as magic stone. Does animal charcoal burn for a shorter time compared to charcoal briquettes?;
A briquette is a block of compressed coal dust, charcoal dust, saw dust, wood chips or biomass, and is used as a fuel in stoves and boilers. Charcoal briquettes made from waste organic materials and charcoal dust burn longer than wood charcoal and are environmentally friendly. The general process of making charcoal briquttes involves: Carbonisation to drive out volatile compounds and moisture, preparation of feed stock, binding, drying and compaction/briquetting using machines. Do briquettes have a potential to be a source of renewable energy if they are made from sustainably harvested biomass or waste agricultural residues?;
Sugar charcoal is a very pure form of carbon made by removing elements of water from sugar. It can be made by dehydrating cane sugar or glucose with concentrated sulphuric acid or by heating sugar in the absence of air to drive off water. Can it be used to remove the brown colour from sugar during its manufacture, making it white?;
Lampblack is formed by burning oils in a limited supply of air. It can be made when petroleum, kerosene, turpentine or candles burn in a limited supply of air. Used as a filler for rubber used to make tyres. Used in printers’ ink, shoe polish, and carbon paper. Is lampblack, one of the forms of amorphous carbon?;
Coke is a pure form of carbon made by heating coal in the absence of air, the destructive distillation of coal. It is the solid left when coal is heated in limited supply of air. It is used as a reducing agent in the extraction of metals like iron and zinc from their ores. Coke is also used as fuel in furnaces, boilers and ovens. Are all the statements, right?;
Charcoal making is a source of income. Does not require formal skills. Its cheap to make. And, it has a ready market. Onyera says that however, charcoal making leads to deforestation, and hence in the long run, drought. That it also causes air pollution and is inefficient and dirty, creating a large amount of black soot. Could he be telling the truth?;
Charcoal stoves have about 10% efficiency, meaning that 90% of the heat is lost while burning. Energy-saving charcoal stoves can be made by use of clay mixed with vermicutile ingredient. In some cases, iron bars and clay bricks may be used and tiles added to beautify and add value to these stoves. Once lit, the stoves can absorb and retain heat in their thick bodies up to approximately 6 hours. Does burning pure carbon leave ash?;
Carbon is not a very reactive element. All allotropes of carbon have similar chemical properties but different physical properties. Which of the following is not a chemical property of carbon? (a) Combustion (b) Reaction with noble gases (c) Reaction with steam (d) Reaction with acids;
Carbon burns in a plentiful supply of oxygen to form carbon dioxide gas. In the process, great heat is generated. For this reason, carbon is used as a source of heat. In limited air, carbon burns to form carbon monoxide, a very poisonous gas. Burning impure carbon leaves ash. Exhaust fumes from cars contain carbon monoxide because of incomplete combustion of petrol or diesel. Is cabonmonoxide the colourless gas that burns with a yellow flame?;
In region A of a deep, brightly glowing coke/coal fire, plenty of air is available. Carbon burns to carbon dioxide. In region B, ascending carbon dioxide is reduced by red hot coke to carbon monoxide. At the surface, the hot carbon monoxide burns in air to form carbon dioxide with a flickering blue flame. If the charcoal burner is in a poorly ventilated room with insufficient air, the reaction at the surface fails to take place. If one stays in such a room, Could they eventually die?;
Concentrated sulphuric acid oxidizes carbon to carbon dioxide which turns lime water milky and itself is reduced to water and sulphur dioxide which turns acidified potassium dichromate from orange to green. Concentrated Nitric acid oxidizes carbon to carbon dioxide and itself is reduced to nitrogen dioxide which appears as reddish-brown fumes. Are all the statements false?; 
Metals higher than carbon in the reactivity series have a higher affinity for oxygen and will not give it up to carbon. However, carbon readily removes oxygen from oxides of metals lower than it in the reactivity series. Thus, it acts as a reducing agent and it is oxidised to carbondioxide. Carbon reduces the oxides of zinc, lead, iron and copper to form a metal and carbondioxide. Oxidation–reduction takes place in reactions for the reducing action of carbon. Are all these statements true?;
Carbon reacts with calcium oxide to form calcium carbide and a colourless gas. Could the gas be the one that turns lime water milky?;
If steam is blown through red hot charcoal, a mixture of carbon monoxide and hydrogen gases are formed. Is this the mixture often referred to as called water gas?; 
Carbon dioxide is a chemical compound composed of one atom of carbon and two atoms of oxygen that occurs in air and occupies 0.03% by volume. Carbon dioxide is a waste product of respiration in living organisms. It also forms from rocks as a result of volcanic eruption, occurs in the mines and it is always present in natural drinking water because it is slightly soluble in it. Could quick lime be used to dry this gas?;
In the laboratory, CO₂ is prepared by reacting a carbonate with dilute acid. Usually CaCO₃/marble chips and dilute HCl are used to prepare carbondioxide. Dilute HCl is poured down the thistle funnel on to CaCO₃ in the flask. Effervescence occurs and a colourless gas is evolved. The gas is passed through a concentrated solution of KHCO₃ or distilled H₂O in a wash bottle to remove hydrochloric acid spray/traces of hydrogen chloride gas. Its then passed through another wash bottle containing concentrated H₂SO₄  or through a U-tube containing fused CaCl₂ to dry it. The gas is then collected by down ward delivery/upward displacement of air as it’s denser than air. Is it true that if the gas is not required dry, it can be simply collected over water as it is only slightly soluble in it?;
Dilute Sulphuric acid is not used in the place of dilute hydrochloric acid in the preparation of carbon dioxide because the salt formed, calcium sulphate, forms a coating on the surface of calcium carbonate which prevents further reaction between the acid and the carbonate. Lead II carbonate is also not used because when it reacts with dilute hydrochloric acid or sulphuric acid, the reaction soon slows down and then stops. This is due to the formation of lead II chloride or lead II sulphate, both of which are insoluble salts. The insoluble salt coats the carbonate preventing it from reacting with the acid. Can the carbondioxide gas be collected by downward displacement of air?;
Carbon dioxide is a colourless and odourless gas. It is denser than air, that is why it is collected by downward delivery. It does not support combustion. Because of its density, it is also used as a fire extinguisher as it displaces oxygen that supports burning. It’s slightly soluble in water, forming carbonic acid, which partially ionizes to produce hydrogen ions that make the solution weakly acidic. Under high pressure, carbon dioxide is quite soluble in frizzy drinks/effervescent drinks. Carbon dioxide can be tested for by passing the gas into a solution of calcium hydroxide/lime water which turns milky. When lime water which turns milky, is it due to the formation of calcium carbonate?; 
Carbondioxide dissolves slightly in water forming carbonic acid which turns litmus solution pale-red. When carbondioxide is passed through a solution of calcium hydroxide, it turns milky. This is due to the formation of insoluble calcium carbonate, a white precipitate. However, when excess carbondioxide is passed, the calcium hydroxide solution will clear again. Could this be due to the formation of soluble calcium hydrogen carbonate along with hydrogen gas?;
When carbondioxide is bubbled through fairly cold concentrated sodium hydroxide or potassium hydroxide or when a jar of carbondioxide is placed in a trough containing fairly cold concentrated sodium hydroxide or potassium hydroxide, the gas is readily absorbed. The solution remains clear due to the formation of a soluble carbonate. In the gas jar experiment, the solution quickly rises into the jar because the gas is rapidly absorbed by the solution. Could these be neutralization reactions?;
Bubbling a mixture of gases through a fairly cold concentrated sodium hydroxide or potassium hydroxide is sometimes used to remove carbon dioxide from the mixture. However, when excess carbondioxide is bubbled through the sodium hydroxide solution for some time, a white solid, sparingly soluble in cold water, appears on the bottom of the boiling tube. Is it true that when carbon dioxide gas is bubbled through the solution of potassium hydroxide for some time, there is no observable change as the product formed is still soluble?; 
When solid sodium hydroxide is simply exposed to air, a colourless solution is formed and later a crystalline solid is formed. Sodium hydroxide is deliquescent and therefore absorbs water from the air to form a solution that absorbs carbondioxide from air forming a white crystalline solid of sodium carbonate decahydrate. Could Na₂CO₃.10H₂O be the chemical formula for the solid formed?;
Carbon dioxide does not support burning. However, when a piece of burning magnesium is lowered into a gas jar of carbon dioxide, it continues to burn for a short time with a sputtering flame, forming black particles on the sides of the gas jar and a white solid. In this case, magnesium reduces carbon dioxide to carbon and itself is oxidized to magnesium oxide. Burning magnesium produces a lot of heat which decomposes carbondioxide into black carbon and oxygen. The oxygen supports the burning of magnesium for a short time forming white magnesium oxide. Could this be an example of a redox reaction?;
When dilute hydrochloric acid is added to the products from the combustion of magnesium and carbon in a gas jar and shaken, the white powder dissolves in the acid leaving behind carbon. This indicates that carbon dioxide contains carbon and is an oxide of carbon. Are these two statements true?;
Carbondioxide is used in fire extinguishers, because it does not burn and its denser than air. Carbondioxide being denser than the air, forms a layer around the burning material. It covers the fire and starves it of oxygen thus putting out the fire. Can carbonmonoxide be used in the place of carbondioxide in fire extinguishers?;
Carbondioxide is used in the manufacture of aerated/carbonated drinks. This is because the solution of the gas in water has a pleasant flavour and taste, the taste of soda water. Although carbondioxide is only slightly soluble, it becomes more soluble under pressure like any other gas. Shedrack says that the solution of carbondioxide in water under pressure is sold as “soda water”. That the addition of various flavours, sweeteners and colours to soda water results into a variety of soft drinks. And, that when the container is opened, pressure is released and carbondioxide comes out of the solution causing effervescence. Could he be right?;
Solid carbon dioxide is used as a refrigerating agent. When carbondioxide is cooled to a temperature 0f -78⁰C, it solidifies. As it sublimes, it takes heat from the things around it thus helping to keep them cool. It is commonly used for perishable goods and by ice cream and soft drink vendors as a coolant. Is solid carbondioxide different from dry ice?;
Rain-pieces of solid carbondioxide/dry ice can be dropped into the clouds to cool them enough to form rain. This is done in places where there is unreliable rain fall. Dry ice is also used to create the smoke effect seen at pop concerts and on television. It is placed in boiling water and it forms thick clouds of white smoke. The smoke stays close to the floor, does it mean that it is denser than air?;
Carbondioxide is used in Ammonia-soda or Solvay process for making sodium hydrogen carbonate and sodium carbonate. It is also used in bakeries. When heated, baking powder produces carbondioxide which forms bubbles inside bread and cakes making them light. Other reactions that produce carbon dioxide include: fermentation, combustion of hydrocarbons, respiration and action of heat on carbonates and hydrogen carbonates. Is calcium nitrate, one of the end-products of the solvay process?;
Is it true that industrially, carbondioxide can be prepared by burning of carbon/coke or by liquefication of air or as a byproduct during the fermentation of sugars to alcohol or from the decomposition of limestone to produce carbon dioxide and quick lime that can then be used to make cement?; 
Quick lime is obtained on a large scale by strongly heating limestone/calcium carbonate in a lime kiln. During the reaction, limestone decomposes completely to quick lime and carbondioxide. The heat required for the reaction is supplied by burning coke. The quick lime sinks to the bottom of the lime kiln where it is removed. Is quick lime a basic substance?;
Quick lime is used for drying ammonia gas since it is hygroscopic. It is used in the manufacture of cement. Cement is impure calcium oxide. It is a mixture of quick lime, clay, some sand and silicates. Concrete is a mixture of cement, sand, gravel and water. Quick lime is used as a fertilizer since it contains calcium ions, a plant nutrient. It is used in the manufacture of slaked lime. Is slaked lime, solid calcium hydroxide?;
Slaked lime is a solid hydroxide obtained by adding cold water to quick lime. When water is added to quick lime, it swells with a hissing sound, liberating a lot of heat and a white solid is formed which cracks and crumbles to form a white powder, called slaked lime. Slaked lime is used to make white wash, a quick suspension of slaked lime in water. It is also used to smoothen walls of buildings, to soften hard water, to make mortar, a mixture of slaked lime, sand, and water and to stick bricks as well as plastering walls and as a fertilizer. Does the addition of slaked lime to alkaline soils, improve the soil pH?;
Carbon monoxide is a toxic, colourless and odourless gas that is produced from incomplete/partial combustion of carbon-containing substances. Since it is a poisonous gas, it is usually prepared in a fume cupboard. Carbon monoxide can be prepared by the action of concentrated sulphuric acid on any of the following compounds except? (a) HCOOH (b) HCOONa (c) Oxalic acid (d) sodium ethanoate?;
Concentrated sulphuric acid is a very strong dehydrating agent and removes water from methanoic acid forming carbon monoxide and water. Concentrated sulphuric acid dehydrates sodium methanoate to form water, sodium hydrogen sulphate and carbon monoxide. No heating required. It also dehydrates oxalic acid on gentle warming, producing a mixture of gases that is passed through a wash bottle containing concentrated potassium hydroxide solution to absorb carbondioxide. Is the remaining carbonmonoxide collected by downward delivery?;
Samantha says that if the carbon monoxide being prepared is required dry, it is passed through a bottle containing concentrated sulphuric acid and is collected by use of a syringe or downward displacement of air. She also says that the reaction between concentrated sulphuric acid and oxalic acid is called a dehydration reaction because elements of water are removed from the oxalic acid by the concentrated sulphuric acid, a drying agent. Are her statements true?;
Couldn't one just get carbonmonoxide from carbon dioxide. What if carbon dioxide is passed over red-hot charcoal in a combustion tube to give carbonmonoxide, and the excess carbon dioxide is then passed through a wash bottle containing concentrated potassium hydroxide solution to absorb it. Clearly, carbonmonoxide can be obtained this way. But is the reaction between excess carbon dioxide and concentrated potassium hydroxide solution, a displacement reaction?;
Carbonmonoxide is colourless, tasteless and odourless. It’s neutral to litmus. It’s slightly less dense than air. It’s only slightly soluble in water. Does it burn in air with a pale blue flame to form carbon dioxide?;
Carbon monoxide burns in air with a pale blue flame forming carbon dioxide. For this reason, it is not used in fire extinguisher because it supports burning. It is quite a strong reducing agent and reduces oxides of copper, lead, iron and Zinc to their respective metals and itself is oxidized to carbon dioxide. This reaction is used to extract metals from their oxides. Is it true that dry carbon monoxide reduces black copper II oxide to a grey solid and a colourless gas that turns lime water is evolved?;
When carbon monoxide gas is passed over heated PbO, a grey metallic lead is formed. This reaction occurs at high temperature in the blast furnace. Does the same gas also reduce ZnO?;
Carbon monoxide is a polutant. Car exhaust fumes contain carbon monoxide formed by incomplete combustion of fuel. In a charcoal stove, carbon monoxide is produced when carbon burns in the absence of air. The reaction can occur in two stages: Carbon burns in oxygen to form carbon dioxide. The carbon dioxide reacts with more carbon to form carbon monoxide. Does the carbon monoxide burn in more oxygen with a green flame to form carbondioxide?;
Blood contains red haemoglobin, which combines with oxygen to form oxy-haemoglobin that moves to all parts of the body and supplies them with oxygen. Haemoglobin however, has a higher affinity for carbon monoxide than oxygen. Carbon monoxide forms a stable compound with haemoglobin in red blood cells, preventing oxygen from binding with it. It combines with haemoglobin to form bright red substances, carboxyhaemoglobin which stops blood from carrying oxygen. This deprives an individual’s cells of oxygen. Is it true that the affected individual develops headaches, fatigue and they can even die of suffocation?; 
Carbon monoxide is actually a more dangerous since it is poisonous, has no colour and smell. Supplying excess air to ensure complete combustion and fitting vehicles with catalytic converters can reduce the amount of carbon monoxide from combustion of carbon containing compounds. Is it true that Haemoglobin, has a lower affinity for carbon monoxide than oxygen?;
Carbon monoxide is used extensively in the extraction of metals as a reducing agent e.g., extraction of iron in a blast furnace and in the refining of nickel. It is used in the manufacture of methanol used in anti-freezer mixtures in cold countries to prevent ice from forming in car radiators. It is used in the manufacture of synthetic petrol. Can it be used as fuel in form of producer gas and water gas?;
Producer gas is fuel gas consisting of carbon monoxide gas and nitrogen gas in the ratio of 1:2. This gas is made into two stages. Coke is heated in excess air to form carbondioxide gas. Carbondioxide produced is reacted with more soot at elevated temperature to form carbon monoxide. The carbon monoxide and unreacted nitrogen obtained by fractional distillation of air form producer gas. This gas is used to heat the retorts during the manufacture of Zinc to heat lime kilns, steel furnaces and glass furnaces. It's also a source of nitrogen during the manufacture of ammonia in the Haber process. Is producer gas, the same as syngas?;
Water gas, also known as synthesis gas or syngas, is a fuel gas consisting of an equal volume of carbon monoxide and hydrogen. The gas is prepared by passing steam over coke, heated to a very high temperature. During the reaction, carbon monoxide and hydrogen gases are formed. Sumayiya says that water gas is used as a source of fuel gas for heating. That it acts as an industrial source for hydrogen gas and that it is used for making methanol by passing more hydrogen gas through the mixture. Is she also right to say that water gas is a better source of fuel than producer gas?;
Water gas is a better source of fuel than producer gas because it produces a lot of heat far more than that of producer gas. The hydrogen gas and carbon monoxide gas of water gas both burn to produce heat but for producer gas, it is only the carbon monoxide gas that burns to produce heat. Is it true that both carbon dioxide and carbon monoxide are colourless, odourless, do not support combustion and are heavier than air?;
Some carbonates occur naturally in rock formation. The common examples are marble, chalk and limestone which are different mineral forms of the same carbonate. Aluminium carbonate doesn’t exist. Hydrogen carbonates are acid salts of carbonic acid formed by the replacement of only one the hydrogen ions by a metal ion or ammonium radical. Is it true that Magnesium and Calcium hydrogen carbonates exist only in solution?;
To prepare sodium carbonatein the laboratory, bubble carbon dioxide into a moderately concentrated sodium hydroxide solution for some time until a white solid is formed. Filter off the solid, wash it 2-3 times with a little cold distilled water and dry it. Transfer the solid to a hard glass tube and heat strongly until no further water vapor and carbon dioxide are given off. Sodium carbonate is left as a fine white powder. Is it true that if the crystalline form/washing soda is required, the anhydrous powder is dissolved in a minimum amount of hot water and crystallized to obtain Na₂CO₃.H₂O/washing soda?;
Washing soda/Na₂CO₃.10H₂O/Sodium carbonate decahydrate is used for softening water by precipitating the calcium and/or magnesium ions from their solutions as their respective carbonates. It is a large translucent crystal, which on exposure to air, loses mass and becomes coated with a fine powder which renders it opaque. Each molecule of washing soda gives up 9 molecules of water of crystallization. This process of giving up water of crystallization to the atmosphere is termed as efflorescence. The substance that loses its water of crystallization is known as an efflorescent substance. Are all the statements true?;
When it rains, the naturally soft water from the rain dissolves carbondioxide to form carbonic acid. When water containing carbonic acid flows over rocks containing limestone, the lime dissolves to form calcium hydrogencarbonate which when discharged in water causes temporary hardness. Hard water uses a lot of soap. Is this because the soap first reacts with magnesium and calcium ions present in the hard water, forming a brown precipitate known as scum?;
Aggie says that it is not until magnesium and calcium ions have been precipitated out, that the soap will form lather with water. Soapless detergents that don't produce scum with hard water can be used. The water samples that easily form lather with soap are referred to as soft water. Boiling can remove temporary hardness of water but not permanent water hardness. Is it true that on boiling temporary hard water in kettles and pans, solids commonly known as fur form?;
On boiling temporary hard water, the heat decomposes the soluble hydrogen carbonates into insoluble carbonates. The fur, which is a layer of precipitates of calcium or magnesium carbonate is a bad conductor of heat leading to wastage of fuel. Fur on a kettle or pan can be removed by the addition of a little vinegar. The vinegar only attacks the carbonates not the metal. Hard water forms boiler scale inside boilers by the same reactions that form fur. And just like fur, boiler scale too, is a poor conductor of heat and hence wastes fuel. It also causes blockages in hot water pipes. Is oxalic acid, the acid in vinegar?;
Washing soda can be used for softening water by precipitating the calcium and/or magnesium ions from their solutions as their respective carbonates. Washing soda dissolves in water and reacts with calcium ions or magnesium ions which are removed as insoluble carbonates. The other ways of softening water include: Passing hard water through permutit, distillation and by use of ion exchange. Does distillation remove both permanent and temporary water hardness?;
Hard water contains alot of calcium compounds, usually calcium phosphate, which helps to form healthy teeth and bones in animals. It coats lead pipes with a thin layer of lead II sulphate or lead II carbonate, cutting down the possibility of lead poisoning which is common in soft water. It has a nice taste and is thus used in the brewing industry. It contains calcium carbonate necessary for the formation of shells of eggs and of many animals such as snails. Creates a beautiful scenery when the stalactites and stalagmites form, that can act as tourist attractions. Do stalactites grow from the floor of a cave?; 
Beautiful structures such as stalactites and stalagmites are found in underground caverns in limestone areas. Stalactites are solid structures which grow hanging from the roof of a cave. Stalagmites are solid structures which grow from the floor of a cave. Jeninah says that they are deposits of calcium carbonate or magnesium carbonate formed when rain water containing calcium hydrogen carbonate or magnesium hydrogen carbonate evaporates. Is that true?;
On a large scale, Na₂CO₃ is manufactured by the Solvay process. 28% NaCl is slowly dropped down an absorber tower, up which Ammonia passes. The brine becomes saturated with ammonia, forming ammoniacal brine, which flows slowly from the top of the tower, while CO₂, from the decomposition of CaCO₃, is forced to rise up the tower from its base. The tower is fitted with perforated mushroom shaped baffles at intervals to delay the flow of ammoniacal brine and also increase the surface area for the reaction. The ammoniacal brine reacts with CO₂ to form NaHCO₃ as precipitates. Precipitation is assisted by cooling the lowest third of the chamber. The NaHCO₃ precipitates in the lower part of the tower in form of a wet white sludge and is filtered off from the sludge, washed to remove ammonium compounds and heated to form anhydrous Na₂CO₃. Is anhydrous Na₂CO₃, the same as washing soda?;
Anhydrous sodium carbonate/Soda ash formed from the solvay process has a wide market. In the very same process, carbon dioxide is recycled for use and ammonia is recovered from the ammonium chloride by reacting ammonium chloride with calcium hydroxide, obtained by adding water to calcium oxide, obtained from the decomposition of calcium carbonate. Ammonia too is recycled for use. Therefore, the end products of the Solvay process are calcium chloride and sodium carbonate. Is it true that calcium chloride is used in the extraction of sodium?; 
Sodium carbonate is used in the making of glass. Ordinary bottle glass is made by fusing together sodium carbonate, calcium carbonate, silicon dioxide and a little carbon. Broken glasses are added to assist fusion. The resulting mixture produces glass on cooling. Sodium carbonate is used in the manufacture of water glass that is used to preserve eggs, in fire proofing and production of cement. Sodium carbonate is also used in domestic water softening, in soap industries in the manufacture of dry soap powders and in paper and textile industries. Does it only remove temporary water hardness?;
To a test solution in a test tube, Mary added dilute nitric acid and there was effervescence of a gas that turned calcium hydroxide solution milky. Should she suspect carbonate ions to be present in this test solution?;
When Peter bubbled carbondioxide through concentrated sodium hydroxide solution. A white powder was precipitated. The precipitate was deposited as a white powder which was filtered off, washed 2-3 times with a little cold water and allowed to dry. Could the precipitate be sodium hydrogencarbonate?;
Sodium hydrogen carbonate is used in baking powder for making cakes and bread. It’s used in fire extinguishers. Is it also used for making healthy salts/antacids that neutralize excess hydrochloric acid in the stomach?; 
To differentiate a carbonate from a hydrogencarbonate. Rosaria added magnesium sulphate solution or magnesium chloride solution to the test solution. There was no observable change. Should she confirm the presence of a carbonate in the test solution?;
On earth, carbon circulates through land, oceans and the atmosphere. The balance of processes which give out carbon dioxide and those which use carbon dioxide is called the carbon cycle. It is the carbon cycle that shows how carbon is recycled in nature. Carbondioxide is removed from the atmosphere by: Dissolution in water, photosynthesis and hardening of Mortar. Is it true that carbon dioxide is added to the atmosphere by: Combustion of fuels and decay of organic material, respiration, making lime, making of beer and wines by fermentation of sugar or starch and from water, if the percentage in air drops?; 
Most of the substances used in our homes to produce heat and light contain carbon. These include firewood, kerosene, natural gas etc. These materials are used as fuels because they give a lot of heat and/or light when burnt in air. Fuels may be made from plants or animals. A fuel is any substance that is burnt to provide heat or power. Is it the mechanical energy in these carbon-based fuels that is converted to other forms of energy?;
Most fuels are burnt to obtain their energy in form of heat. The type of fuel used depends on several factors such as its availability, the cost and storage, among many others. Generally, a perfect fuel should be cheap, not pollute the environment, readily available, burn easily producing large amounts of heat, be easily handled, stored and transported. Can fossil fuels be considered perfect fuels?;
Natural resources are substances or materials that occur naturally in the environment and are used by humans for various purposes. They can be classified into renewable and non-renewable resources. Non-renewable fuels are formed naturally and are available in limited amounts. They can’t be easily replaced due to the long time they take to form. Is geothermal energy, a non-renewable fuel?;
Crude oil is a mixture of many products and when refined by fractional distillation, several useful products are obtained. These include petrol, diesel, paraffin and natural gas/bottled gas. Non-renewable fuels include fossil fuels, nuclear energy and natural gas. Renewable fuels on the other hand are easily formed over a relatively shorter period of time. Renewable fuels include solar energy, hydro power energy, biomass energy, geothermal energy and wind energy. Are all these statements true?;
Opting for renewable fuels over non-renewable ones is preferable due to their sustainability and reduced environmental harm. Renewable fuels offer numerous advantages such as reduced maintenance needs, the ability for repeated usage, and environmental benefits due to minimal air pollution emissions. They also serve as reliable sources of energy. However, challenges arise from the necessity for efficient storage solutions, which can be costly, and the susceptibility to interruptions from unpredictable weather events, which can disrupt the consistency of these energy resources. Is nuclear energy, one of the renewable fuels?;
Non-renewable fuels, such as fossil fuels, have traditionally been the backbone of global energy systems. They are cheap, cheap to convert from one type to another, easy to use and easy to store, provide jobs to many people and are a consistent and readily available source of energy. However, these fuels take millions of years to form and thus hard to replace once they have been depleted, leading to energy security concerns and economic instability. They require extensive extraction processes, leading to environmental degradation and ecosystem disruption. Is it true that on combustion, they release high levels of pollutants into the atmosphere, contributing to air pollution, climate change, and adverse health effects?; 
Fossil fuels, categorized as non-renewable energy sources, originate from the decomposition of ancient photosynthetic organisms i.e., plants, algae, phytoplankton, and certain photosynthetic bacteria that lived millions of years ago, died and were buried deep underground. Fossil fules are accident-prone and the drilling process to obtain them is quite a dangerous process. Coal, petroleum and natural gas are the 3 main fossil fuels. Is hydrogen, the major component of methane?;
Petroleum is a sticky black liquid and a mixture of hydrocarbons. Natural gas consists mainly of methane. Another carbon containing fuel is wood that is formed when plants die and dry. When these fuels are burnt, the carbon compounds are oxidised to carbon dioxide. Is it true that carbon monoxide, unburnt hydrocarbons and soot are produced if there is incomplete combustion of carbon containing compounds?;
Unburnt hydrocarbons are released due to incomplete combustion of fuels. Breathing in these gases may cause cancer. Ozone is produced when oxides of nitrogen react with unburnt hydrocarbons in the presence of sunlight. At ground level, ozone is a pollutant, as breathing the gas causes respiratory problems. Ozone irritates the eyes and lungs. The ozone layer is found high in the Earth’s atmosphere. Although ozone is regarded as an air pollutant at ground level, the ozone layer has an important role of absorbing excess UV radiation from the Sun. Is it true that ozone is not a greenhouse gas?; 
It has been found out that the ozone layer is depleting and substances such as chlorofluorocarbons/CFCs contribute to this. CFCs are compounds that contain chlorine, fluorine and carbon. Chlorine radicals are produced when CFCs are exposed to UV radiation. These free radicals destroy the ozone layer by reacting with ozone molecules. Ozone depletion would cause more UV radiation to reach the Earth’s surface, which becomes a problem as excess UV radiation causes health issues such as skin cancer and formation of eye cataracts. The use of CFCs has since been banned in most countries. Despite this, ozone depletion will continue as CFCs released long ago are still present in the atmosphere. Is it true that CFCs were widely used as refrigerants in refrigeration and air conditioning systems?;
The sun emits radiations that pass through the atmosphere of the earth with little absorption and warms up the surface of the earth. The warm surface of the earth reflects back the radiations in form of infrared radiations. The infrared radiation is absorbed by gases such as carbon dioxide, water vapour, methane, nitrous oxide and ozone which radiate some heat back to the ground leading to warming up of the earth. The warming up of the earth is known as the greenhouse effect. The gases like carbon dioxide, water vapour and methane that cause the warming up of the earth are referred to as greenhouse gases. Is it true that O₃ is not a greenhouse gas?;
A greenhouse gas is a gas in the atmosphere that absorbs and emits radiation within the thermal infrared range. Excessive amounts of greenhouse gases result in a stronger greenhouse effect, which leads to global warming. Global warming refers to the general increase in global temperatures due to the accumulation of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. When greenhouse gases are produced faster than the rate at which they are removed from the atmosphere, an accumulation of these gases causes the atmosphere to warm, resulting into changes in the climate. Is it true that changes in climate lead to flooding, storms, spread of diseases, increase in food insecurity among many others?;
While pure water has a pH of 7, rain water is usually slightly acidic in unpolluted areas. This is due to the dissolving of carbon dioxide to form carbonic acid. In polluted areas where oxides of nitrogen and sulphur dioxide are present, rain water becomes more acidic. This is due to the formation of strong acids in rain water, such as nitric acid, nitrous acid and sulphurous acid. Does acid rain have a pH above 7?; 
Acid rain reacts with structures containing metal or carbonates, causing them to corrode and be destroyed. It destroys aquatic habitats by making them too acidic for aquatic life. The soil pH is also greatly lowered, making it unsuitable for plants to survive. Acid rain also kills fish in fresh water lakes. Can it be prevented by fitting motor vehicles with catalytic converters to reduce emissions of carbon monoxide, oxides of nitrogen and unburnt hydrocarbons?;
Given the numerous disadvantages of the greenhouse gases, measures are being taken globally to prevent adding on to their existing amount in the atmosphere. The burning of fossil fuels for energy needs to be reduced to reduce emissions of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases. To conserve deposits of fossil fuels, alternative energy sources like biogas, biodiesel and alcohols could be used. Some countries are now using alcohol as an additive in petrol to produce a cleaner fuel. In advanced countries, efforts are being made to have all cars on the roads electrified as soon as possible. Is biogas, the same as natural gas?;
Biogas made from anaerobic digestion of waste materials and electricity in form hydro power and solar are now being used in homes as alternatives to wood fuel. Catalytic converters are being installed in exhaust systems of cars to reduce the emissions of carbon monoxide, oxides of nitrogen and unburnt hydrocarbons. These substances undergo redox reactions in the presence of platinum and rhodium catalysts to form substances that are less harmful. Is it true that the carbon monoxide is oxidised to form carbon dioxide, oxides of nitrogen are reduced to form nitrogen and unburnt hydrocarbons are further oxidised to form carbon dioxide and water?;
While sulphur dioxide is not considered a traditional greenhouse gas, it is a major air pollutant emitted from industrial processes such as power plants and industrial boilers. Sulphur dioxide is being removed from waste gases emitted from industrial processes through flue gas desulphurisation. This involves passing the waste gases through calcium carbonate or calcium oxide. Sulphur dioxide is removed from these gases as it reacts with basic substances to form calcium sulphite which then undergoes further oxidation with atmospheric oxygen to form calcium sulphate. Does sulphur dioxide have a great ability to absorb infrared radiation?; 
Whenever possible, walk or ride to avoid carbon emissions. Use public transport means to limit the number of cars on roads. Turn off lights that are not in use. Avoid bush burning and deforestation. Reuse and recycle plastic materials. Instead of burning fossil fuels, use renewable energy sources. Remove traces of sulphur from fuels before burning. Remove sulphur dioxide from chimney gases of power stations. Modify engines to run on a weaker mixture of fuel and air. Ensure the vehicle engines are well maintained. Replace chlorofluorocarbons with alternative substances serving similar functions. And where you find space, please plant a tree. Are such measures good for a sustainable development?;
