Qn. In this experiment you will investigate the rate of reaction between dilute hydrochloric acid and magnesium ribbon at different temperatures.
a) FA1 which is 2M hydrochloric acid (160cm)
b) Substance G which is magnesium ribbon (9cm long)
c) All other apparatus required for the investigation
Carryout your own investigation at room temperature, 35⁰C, 45⁰C, 55⁰C and 65⁰C of hydrochloric acid and write a brief report about your findings. Your report should include the following:
a. Aim of the experiment.
b. Variables of the experiment.
c. Hypothesis.
d. List of apparatus and materials used.
e. Procedure of the experiment.
f. Tabulation of data.
g. A graph of 1/t against temperature of hydrochloric acid.
h. Gradient / slope of your graph plotted in (g) above and indicate its units.;
Qn. In this experiment you will investigate the rate of reaction between sodium thiosulphate and dilute hydrochloric acid at different temperatures.
You are provided with the following:
a) BA1 which is 0.07M sodium thiosulphate (155cm³)
b) BA2 which is 2M hydrochloric acid (30cm³)
g. (i)   A graph of time against temperature of hydrochloric acid.
   (ii)  A graph of 1/t against temperature of hydrochloric acid.
h. Conclusion from the investigation.;
Qn. A group of S2 students found metals magnesium ribbon, copper turnings, zinc granules and iron fillings in the laboratory. They are having a discussion on which metal reacts fastest with sulphuric acid:
(20 marks)
i.      Title of the experiment
ii.     Aim
iii.    Materials used
iv.     Steps followed
v.      Observations/results
vi.     Discussion
vii.    Conclusion;
Qn. While conducting experiments in a chemistry laboratory, researchers often investigate the factors influencing the rate of a chemical reaction. Their objective is usually to understand how changes in these factors affect reaction rates and the equilibrium in the case of reversible reactions. Such knowledge is crucial for optimizing industrial processes. 
You have been chosen to sensitise your fellow classmates about this very topic.
Task: 
As chemistry student, make a write up you will use during the presentation.;
