Physical properties, which are observable or measurable characteristics used to identify and describe matter without causing a chemical change, can be categorized as intensive or extensive. They also encompass sensory properties detectable by our senses and behaviour-related properties describing how matter interacts under certain conditions. Is this all true?;


Trends in melting and boiling points. Across the period of elements from the left to the right, melting and boiling points increase from group I to group IV because of increasing strength of metallic bonds, as the number of electrons which each atom contributes to the sea of electrons increases and then begin to decrease onwards due to a decrease in the strength of the van der waals forces, holding the atoms together. 

Trends in electrical conductivity. Electrical conductivity generally increases across the period.

Trends in density. The density of an element is affected by factors such as atomic mass, atomic radius and crystal structure. Atoms of elements in the same period usually have the same number of energy levels. However, the number of protons and electrons increases among atoms across a given period, from left to right. Thus, atomic mass increases across a period, from left to right. Note that the electrons are being added to the already existing energy levels. This makes the nuclear charge overcome the shielding effect of inner electrons for the outer electrons.  Thus, atomic radius (size) decreases across a period, from left to right. The density of metallic elements in a given period tends to increase as the atomic number increases and then starts to decrease. As atomic radius decreases across a period, and atomic number increases, the density increases across the period. High densities are because of the small size of atoms that allows close packing. However, the last elements in a given period have their sizes increasing due to increasing inter electronic repulsion and this increases their volumes causing a decrease in density.



Trends in physical properties of elements across period 3. Melting and boiling points. Metals (Na, Mg, Al) have high melting and boiling points due to strong metallic bonding. Aluminum, with its stronger metallic bonds, has a higher melting point than sodium and magnesium. Silicon, a metalloid, has a very high melting point due to its giant covalent structure with strong convalent bonds that require high energy to break for boiling or melting to take place. Nonmetals (P, S, Cl, Ar) exhibit lower melting and boiling points. Phosphorus and sulphur form simple molecular structures with weak van der waals forces of attraction between the molecules, resulting in relatively low melting and boiling points because their bonds require little energy to break for boiling or melting to take place, though sulpur has higher melting and boiling points than phosphorus due to larger molecular size (S₈ versus P₄). Chlorine is a diatomic gas (Cl₂) with low melting and boiling points, and argon is a noble gas with extremely low melting and boiling points. Electrical conductivity. Metals (Na, Mg, Al) are good conductors of electricity due to the presence of free-moving electrons. Silicon, a metalloid, has moderate electrical conductivity, which can be enhanced by doping. Nonmetals (P, S, Cl, Ar) are poor conductors of electricity. Density: Density generally increases from sodium to aluminum, then decreases from silicon to argon. Electronegativity and Ionization Energy: Electronegativity and ionization energy increase across the period from sodium to argon.


• In groups, revisit prior learning about the Periodic table and identify patterns in the arrangement of elements in groups and across periods in terms of: • proton number, • electron arrangement and • properties. 


[Group Work 2] {Predict physical and chemical properties of different elements in Group I}. 
 

Chemical families. This refers to elements with the same chemical properties i.e., elements in the same group of the periodic table with the same number of electrons in the outer most shell. Elements in the same group react in similar ways because they have the same number of electrons in their outer most energy level or shell. Down the group of metals, reactivity increases. This is because of increase in atomic size (atomic radius). As the size of atoms increase, the outer most electrons become loosely held because they are no longer strongly attracted by the nucleus, hence, such electrons are easily lost. Because metals react by loss of electrons, the more easily a metal loses electrons, the more reactive that metal is. Down the group of non-metals, reactivity decreases. This is due to an increase in atomic size (atomic radius). As the atomic sizes increase, the forces of attraction of the nucleus for the electrons decreases, hence electrons cannot be gained readily. The more easily a non-metal gains electrons, the more reactive that non-metal is. Across the period of elements from the left to the right, reactivity decreases from group I to group IV and then increases up to group VII and falls sharply in group VIII. This is because, as you go across the period, the effective force of the nucleus increases, hence the outer most electrons become more strongly attracted. The common chemical families are: Alkali/alkaline metals; alkaline earth metals; halogens and noble gases. 


The alkali metals (Group I). Group I contains six elements placed in a vertical column on the far left of the periodic table. Keeping focus on the first 20 elements in the periodic table, only lithim, sodium and potassium will be explored. Atoms of group I elements have one electron in the outer most shell which is easily lost during chemical reactions leaving a single positively charged ion. Li (2:1), Na (2:8:1), K (2:8:8:1). They are therefore monovalent. These metals are very reactive and are kept under oil in the laboratory where they have no contact with water and air. They are called alkali metals because they react with water to form alkaline solutions. Physical properties of Alkali metals. They have low melting and boiling points because each metal contributes only one electron to the sea of electrons hence weak metallic bonding. When any of the group I metals is melted, the metallic bond is weakened enough for the atoms to move freely, and is broken down completely when the boiling point is reached. The larger metal ions have a lower charge density (effective nuclear charge) and are attracted to the 'sea' of negative electrons less than the smaller ions. The result of this weaker bonding is a reduction in the melting point of the alkali metals on descending the group and also a decrease in the hardness. The decrease in melting points and hardness reflects the decrease in the strength of each metallic bond. Lithium is the alkali metal with the hardest structure and the highest melting point. Alkali metals are soft and show shiny surfaces when freshly cut. The softness decreases down the group and the shiny surfaces soon tarnish due to reaction with oxygen to form the oxides. They conduct electricity and heat due to mobile electrons. They are relatively light (have low densities); Lithium, sodium and potassium are less dense than water (less than 1gcm⁻³); so, they float on water. It is difficult to develop a simple explanation for this trend because the density of an element is affected by factors such as atomic mass, atomic radius and crystal structure, all of which change down the group. Atomic radius increases down the group, so the volume of the atoms also increases. Fewer sodium atoms than lithium ions, therefore, can be packed into a given volume. However, as the atoms become larger, their masses increase. A given number of sodium atoms will weigh more than the same number of lithium atoms. Therefore, 1cm³ of sodium contains fewer atoms than the same volume of lithium, but each atom weighs more. Mathematical calculations are required to determine the densities. They do not possess tensile strength to any appreciable extent. Group I elements are the most reactive metals. They are the most electropositive elements. Electropositivity refers to the ability of an element to lose electrons. 



Reactions of alkali metals with air, water and chlorine. Reactivity of the alkaline metals increases down the group due to increase in atomic size, increasing the ease to lose outer electrons (i.e., potassium is the most reactive, followed by sodium and lithium is the least reactive). 1) Reaction with air. When alkali metals are heated in oxygen, they burn readily forming their respective metal oxides. Potassium burns with a bright purple flame producing white solids of potassium oxide. 4K(s) + O₂(g) → 2K₂O(s). Sodium burns in plenty of air with a bright yellow flame, forming yellow solids of sodium peroxide. In limited in air, sodium burns with a yellow flame to form a white solid, sodium oxide. 4Na(s) + 2O₂(g) → 2Na₂O₂(s) (In excess air). 4Na(s) + O₂(g) → 2Na₂O(s) (In limited air). Lithium burns in oxygen with a crimson flame (intensive white) to form a white solid, lithium oxide. 4Li(s) + O₂(g) → 2Li₂O(s). 2) Reaction with water. All the alkali metals react with cold water to produce hydrogen gas and their respective metal hydroxides (alkaline solutions). Potassium reacts very vigorously, darts on water and burns with a bright purple (lilac) flame, producing fumes of hydrogen gas and an alkaline solution of potassium hydroxide. 2K(s) + 2H₂O(l) → 2KOH(aq) + H₂(g). Sodium melts into a silvery ball, darts on water, reacting vigorously with water, producing fumes of hydrogen gas with a hissing sound and an alkaline solution of sodium hydroxide. The sodium reduces in size as the reaction proceeds until when it finally disappears. 2Na(s) + 2H₂O(l) → 2NaOH(aq) + H₂(g). Lithium floats on the water surface, gradually dissolving, producing hydrogen gas. An alkaline solution is formed. 2Li(s) + 2H₂O(l) → 2LiOH(aq) + H₂(g). 3) Reaction with chlorine The alkaline metals react with chlorine to form metal chloride salts. E.g., Potassium burns in chlorine to form fumes of potassium chloride. K(s) + Cl₂(g) → KCl(s). Sodium continues to burn in chlorine with a bright yellow flame to form white fumes of sodium chloride. Na(s) + Cl₂(g) → NaCl(s). Lithium reacts with chlorine to form lithium chloride. 2Li(s) + Cl₂(g) → 2LiCl(s). 4) Reaction with acids. Alkaline metals react explosively with acids to liberate hydrogen gas and forming a corresponding salt. E.g., sodium reacts with hydrochloric acid to form sodium chloride and hydrogen gas. 2Na(s) + 2HCl(aq) → 2NaCl(aq) + H₂(g). Potassium reacts with sulphuric acid to form potassium sulphate and hydrogen gas. 2K(s) + H₂SO₄(aq) → K₂SO₄(aq) + H₂(g). 


Uses of alkali metals.


• In groups, research, discuss and report on group I elements: • general physical properties of lithium, sodium, and potassium; • changes in the physical properties from lithium to potassium with respect to hardness, density, and melting point; • chemical properties of lithium, sodium, and potassium; • the similarities in chemical properties of lithium, sodium, and potassium; • the relationship between the chemical properties of Group I elements and their electron arrangements; Have a class discussion and make conclusions about group I elements. 



The alkaline earth metals (Group II elements). All group II elements have 2 electrons in the outermost shell. They are divalent. Be (2:2), Mg (2:8:2), Ca (2:8:8:2). They are called alkaline earth metals because they are the only metals found beneath the earth which are alkaline. Other metals found beneath the earth include gold, copper, etc. As the group is descended, the size of the atom increases as more energy levels are added. Physical properties of group II metals. Higher melting and boiling points than those of group I metals. This is because these metals release more electrons into the electron cloud forming a stronger metallic bond in the metal structure. This explains why they are also harder than group I metals. They have high densities because of the small size of atoms that allows close packing. They are good conductors of heat and electricity since they have mobile electrons. They are silver-gray in colour when pure and clean. 

Chemical reactions of alkaline earth metals. Alkaline earth metals are less reactive than alkaline metals. This is because the valence electrons in alkaline earth metals are held more strongly due to increased effective nuclear charge making them not to be easily released. Reactivity of the metals increases down the group due to increase in atomic size. (Calcium is the most reactive, followed by magnesium then beryllium). 1) Reaction with air. These metals burn in air with their characteristic flames forming their respective metal oxides. Magnesium burns in air with a brilliant white flame, forming white ash of magnesium oxide. 2Mg(s) + O₂(g) → 2MgO(s). Calcium burns in air with a bright orange/red flame, forming white ash of calcium oxide. Ca(s) + O₂(g) → 2CaO(s). Both metals also form some nitrides especially if the supply of oxygen is limited. In limited oxygen, magnesium reacts with nitrogen of air to form a white powder of magnesium nitride. 3Mg(s) + N₂(g) → Mg₃N₂(s) (Magnesium nitride). 3Ca(s) + N₂(g) → Ca₃N₂(s) (Calcium nitride). When the nitrides are dissolved in water and the solution warmed, ammonia gas is liberated and an alkaline solution is also formed. Mg₃N₂(s) + 6H₂O(l) → 3Mg(OH)₂(aq) + 2NH₃(g). Ca₃N₂(s) + 6H₂O(l) → 3Ca(OH)₂(aq) + 2NH₃(g). 2) Reaction with water. Beryllium does not react with water. Magnesium reacts very slowly with cold water, producing very few bubbles of hydrogen gas on the surface of the metal and an alkaline solution of magnesium hydroxide. Mg(s) + 2H₂O(l) → Mg(OH)₂(aq) + H₂(g). However, hot magnesium reacts rapidly with steam, burning with a bright white flame, producing hydrogen gas and white ash of magnesium oxide. 2Mg(s) + 2H₂O(g) → 2MgO(s) + 2H₂(g). Calcium sinks to the bottom as it’s denser than water. Effervescence occurs and hydrogen gas is given off. A cloudy solution of calcium hydroxide is formed. Ca(s) + 2H₂O(l) → Ca(OH)₂(aq) + H₂(g). 3) Reaction with chlorine. The metals burn readily in chlorine to form white anhydrous chloride salts. Magnesium burns brightly in chlorine to form a white solid of magnesium chloride. Mg(s) + Cl₂(g) → MgCl₂(s). Calcium reacts with chlorine to form calcium chloride. Ca(s) + Cl₂(g) → CaCl₂(s). 4) Reaction with acids. Calcium reacts vigorously with acids forming a salt and hydrogen gas. Magnesium reacts steadily with acids forming a salt and hydrogen gas. E.g., magnesium reacts with dilute sulphuric acid forming magnesium sulphate and hydrogen gas. Mg(s) + H₂SO₄(aq) → MgSO₄(aq) + H₂(g). Magnesium reacts with dilute hydrochloric acid giving off hydrogen gas. Mg(s) + 2HCl(aq) → MgCl₂(s) + H₂(g). Uses of alkaline earth metals. Beryllium is used in making parts of high-speed air craft and in missiles. It’s used in nuclear reactors and communication satellites. Calcium hydroxide is used as lime in building industry and road construction. Calcium is used in biological process for the formation of strong bones and teeth. Magnesium is used in photographic flash lights and fireworks. It’s also used in making magnesium hydroxide which is anti-acid medicine. 


Transition metals. These are metals found between group II and group III e.g., Zinc, copper iron chromium, nickel. Characteristics of transition metals. They have high densities, high melting and boiling points. Their valencies are variable i.e., they have more than one valency. They form coloured compounds. They behave as catalysts (most catalysts are transition metals/compounds). 


Halogens (Group VII). The word halogen means ‘salt producer’, since all halogen elements react with most metals to form electrovalent, salt-like compounds. All members of this group have 7 electrons in their outermost shells. They have one electron short of the noble gas structure. They are the most electronegative elements. Electronegativity refers to the ability of an element to gain electrons. Physical properties of Halogens. Halogens exist as diatomic molecules in gas, liquid or solid state i.e., F₂, Cl₂, Br₂ and I₂. This is because they lack one electron to completely fill their outer most energy level, thus, their atoms share electrons in order to completely fill the outer most energy level. They are coloured (Refer to the colour chart). Down the group, physical state changes from gas to liquid to solid. (Fluorine and chlorine are gases at room temperature, bromine is a liquid and, iodine is in solid form, the shiny black iodine solids sublime into a purple vapour on slight heating). The size of the molecules increases down the group due to the increasing size of the halogen atom. They have low melting and boiling points because of the weaker intermolecular forces of attraction. Their melting points and boiling points increase down the group due to strong forces of attraction down the group (the weak Vander Waal’s forces of attraction increase with increase in atomic size). They are poor conductors of electricity and heat. Their solubility in water decreases down the group. Fluorine, chlorine and bromine are soluble and iodine is slightly soluble in water. Their atomic radii increase down the group due to the effect of increasing number of energy levels, increasing nuclear charge. Chemical reactions of Halogens. Halogens are the most reactive nonmetals. The order of reactivity decreases down the group i.e., Fluorine > Chlorine > Bromine > Iodine > Astatine [This follows their order in the periodic table]. This is because these elements react by gaining electrons and down the group, the atomic radius increases, therefore, an incoming electron is less readily attracted by the nucleus. Therefore, the smaller the atom, the more readily and strongly does the nucleus attract an electron to the outer most shell and the more reactive that atom becomes. (a) Reaction with metals. Most heated metals continue to burn in halogens to form salts (metal halides). Metal(s) + halogen(g) → metal halide(s). Sodium continues to burn in a gas jar of chlorine to form dense white fumes which settle as white solids of sodium chloride. A similar reaction occurs with bromine and iodine are used. 2Na(s) + Cl₂(g) → 2NaCl(s). Zn(s) + Cl₂(g) → ZnCl₂(s). 2Fe(s) + 3Cl₂(g) → 2FeCl₃(s). (b) Reaction with water. All the halogens dissolve in water forming a mixture of acids. Chlorine dissolves in water to form a mixture of hydrochloric acid and hypochlorous acid. Cl₂(g) + H₂O(l) → HCl(aq) + HOCl(aq). This solution turns blue litmus paper red then bleaches it. The bleaching action is due to the presence of hypochlorous acid (HOCl) that readily gives up its oxygen to the dye. Note: The bleaching power of halogens decreases down the group. A solution of bromine in water is weakly acidic and weakly bleaching due to formation of weak hydrobromic acid (HBr) and bromic (I) acid (HOBr) respectively. Br₂(g) + H₂O(l) → HOBr(aq) + HBr(aq). (c) Reaction with alkalis. Halogens react with alkalis to form a mixture of salts and water. Cold dilute sodium hydroxide reacts with chlorine to form a pale-yellow solution [A mixture of sodium chloride (NaCl) and sodium hypochlorite (NaOCl)]. Cl₂(g) + 2NaOH(aq) → NaCl(aq) + NaOCl(aq) + H₂O(l). In a hot concentrated solution of an alkali (e.g., NaOH), sodium hypochlorite is not formed, but instead, sodium hypochlorate is formed (NaOCl₃). 3Cl₂(g) + 6NaOH(aq) → 5NaCl(aq) + NaOCl₃(aq) + 3H₂O(l). (d) Displacement reaction of halogens. Chlorine being the most reactive, it displaces all the halogens from their solutions. When chlorine is bubbled through a colourless solution of potassium bromide, the solution gradually changes to red-brown as bromine is displaced from its solution by chlorine. 2KBr(aq) + Cl₂(g) → 2KCl(aq) + Br₂(g). If chlorine is bubbled through a colourless solution of potassium iodide, the solution turns dark brown as iodine is displaced from its solution. 2KI(aq) + Cl₂(g) → 2KCl(aq) + I₂(g). Uses of halogens. Chlorine: As a domestic bleach and as a disinfectant in swimming pools. Manufacture of hydrochloric acid. In paper and textile industry. Manufacture of weed killer iodine. Iodine: Tincture of iodine used for medical purposes. Making of antibacterial agents. Bromine: In photographic industry as silver bromide. Used as petrol additives used in anti-knock petrol. 


Noble gases [Group VIII (O) elements]. They are called noble gases because they do not combine with themselves or with other elements. They are the least reactive nonmetals and are sometimes referred to as the inert elements. This is because of completely filled outermost energy levels which make them stable. Helium (He) [2] [2]. Neon (Ne) [10] [2:8]. Argon (Ar) [18] [2:8:8]. Characteristics of noble gases. 1) Their outer most energy levels are completely filled with electrons, making them very stable elements and chemically non-reactive. However, in spite of their stable electronic configurations, a few compounds have been formed from xenon (e.g., Xenon (II) fluoride, XeF₂) and krypton (E.g., krypton (II) fluoride, KrF₂). 2) The noble gases exist as monatomic gases. 3) They have very low melting and boiling points due to the negligible forces of attraction between the atoms. 4) Noble gases are colourless. Uses of noble gases. Helium is a very light gas and is used in inflating airships, weather balloons and aeroplane tyres. Neon is used extensively in neon lights for advertisement and in lasers. Argon is used in electric light bulbs. It stops oxidation of the hot tungsten filament that can darken the glass bulbs. Argon provides an inert environment for gas-liquid chromatography, for risky welding jobs and for some chemical reactions. Instead of air, a mixture of oxygen and helium is used by divers. 


• In groups, research, discuss and report on: • the electron arrangement of elements in each group and across each period; • the positions of the metals, non-metals and semi-metals; • trends in physical properties, such as melting point, boiling point, and density, across the periods; • trends from metals to non-metals (from sodium to argon); • reactions of the elements of the third period with water, oxygen, and chlorine; Have a class discussion and make conclusions about the trends. 



[Group Work 3] {Detail the trends in typical, physical, and chemical properties of simple compounds of the elements of the third period}. 

Hydrides: Metal Hydrides: Sodium forms ionic hydrides (NaH), which react with water to release hydrogen gas. Nonmetal Hydrides: Nonmetals form covalent hydrides. For example, phosphorus forms phosphine (PH₃), sulphur forms hydrogen sulphide (H₂S), and chlorine forms hydrogen chloride (HCl), which is highly soluble in water forming hydrochloric acid. 

Oxides: Metal Oxides: Sodium oxide (Na₂O) and magnesium oxide (MgO) are basic (react with acids to form a salt and water only), with aluminum oxide (Al₂O₃) being amphoteric (reacting with both acids and bases). Metalloid Oxides: Silicon dioxide (SiO₂) is a weak acid, forming silicic acid in water. It reacts with hot concentrated alkalis. Nonmetal Oxides: Phosphorus oxides (P₄O₆, P₄O₁₀) and sulphur oxides (SO₂, SO₃) are acidic (react with bases to form a salt and water only). Chlorine oxides are also acidic. Argon, being a noble gas, does not form oxides. These metal oxides and SiO₂ have high melting and boiling points because a large amount of heat energy is needed to break the strong bonds which are ionic and covalent respectively. The oxides of P, S and Cl consist of simple molecules with low melting and boiling points. Na₂O and MgO dissolve in water to give basic solutions. However, magnesium oxide is only slightly soluble in water. Al₂O₃ and SiO₂ are insoluble in water. P₄O₁₀ and SO₂ dissolve in water to give acidic solutions. 

Hydroxides: [Refer to previous chapters]

Halides: Metal Halides: Sodium chloride (NaCl), magnesium chloride (MgCl₂), and aluminum chloride (AlCl₃) are ionic compounds. Aluminum chloride exhibits some covalent character and forms dimers (Al₂Cl₆) in the gas phase. Nonmetal Halides: Phosphorus forms PCl₃ and PCl₅, sulphur forms SCl₂, and chlorine forms Cl₂. These are generally covalent compounds. NaCl, MgCl₂ and AlCl₃ are solids with high boiling and melting points because of the large amount of heat required to break the strong ionic bonds. The remaining chlorides of period 3 elements are volatile liquids due to the weak van der waals forces of attraction that hold their molecules together. 


In summary, metals exhibit high melting points, electrical conductivity, and form basic oxides and ionic compounds. Metalloids like silicon show intermediate properties, while nonmetals exhibit lower melting points, poor conductivity, and form acidic oxides and covalent compounds. These trends reflect the underlying changes in the atomic structure and bonding as one moves across the period.


Exercise. Qn) Part of the periodic table is shown below. Figure326.4.3.trends_in_the_periodic_table_image_001.jpg. (a) State: (i) The most reactive metal. (ii) The most reactive nonmetal. (iii) The atom that forms the largest anion. (iv) The most nonreactive element. (b) Write the formulae of the compounds formed between the following pairs of elements and in each case state the type of bonding. (i) W and Q. (ii) T and V. Qn) The atomic number and position of A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H and I in the periodic table are shown below. The letters used are not normal symbols of the elements. Figure327.4.3.trends_in_the_periodic_table_image_002.jpg. (a) Which one of the elements is a noble (inert) gas? (b) What name is given to the elements in the group to which Mg belongs? (c) Which element is likely to; (i) React most violently with chlorine? (ii) Form a coloured compound? (d) Write the formula of the; (i) Oxide of D. (ii) Compound formed between element F and hydrogen. (e) State the type of bond that exists in the chloride of element E;